Canons of the Church of Alexandria.

   Wrongly ascribed to Hippolytus. [2075]

   In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, Amen.
   Those are the canons of the Church, ordinances which Hippolytus wrote,
   by whom the Church speaketh; and the number of them is thirty-eight
   canons. Greeting from the Lord.

   Canon First. Of the Catholic faith.  Before all things should we speak
   of the faith, holy and right, regarding our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son
   of the living God; and we have consequently placed that canon in the
   faith (the symbol); and we agree in this with all reasonable certitude,
   that the Trinity is equal perfectly in honour, and equal in glory, and
   has neither beginning nor end. The Word is the Son of God, and is
   Himself the Creator of every creature, of things visible and invisible.
   This we lay down with one accord, in opposition to those who have said
   boldly, that it is not right to speak of the Word of God as our Lord
   Jesus Christ spake. We come together chiefly to bring out the holy
   truth [2076] regarding God; and we have separated them, because they do
   not agree with the Church in theology, nor with us the sons of the
   Scriptures. On this account we have sundered them from the Church, and
   have left what concerns them to God, who will judge His creatures with
   justice. [2077]  To those, moreover, who are not cognisant of them, we
   make this known without ill-will, in order that they may not rush into
   an evil death, like heretics, but may gain eternal life, and teach
   their sons and their posterity this one true faith.

   Canon Second. Of bishops. A bishop should be elected by all the people,
   and he should be unimpeachable, as it is written of him in the apostle;
   in the week in which he is ordained, the whole people should also say,
   We desire him; and there should be silence in the whole hall, and they
   should all pray in his behalf, and say, O God, stablish him whom Thou
   hast prepared for us, etc.

   Canon Third. Prayer in behalf of him who is made bishop, and the
   ordinance of the Missa. [2078] O God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all consolation, etc.

   Canon Fourth. Of the ordination of a presbyter.

   Canon Fifth. Of the constituting a deacon.

   Canon Sixth. Of those who have suffered for the faith.

   Canon Seventh. Of him who is elected reader and sub-deacon.

   Canon Eighth. Of the gift of healings.

   Canon Ninth. That a presbyter should not dwell in unbefitting places;
   and of the honour of widows.

   Canon Tenth. Of those who wish to become Nazarenes (Christians).

   Canon Eleventh. Of him who makes idols and images, or the artificer.

   Canon Twelfth. Of the prohibition of those works, the authors of which
   are not to be received but on the exhibition of repentance.

   Canon Thirteenth. Of a prince or a soldier, that they be not received
   indiscriminately.

   Canon Fourteenth. That a Nazarene may not become a soldier unless by
   order.

   Canon Fifteenth. Enumeration of works which are unlawful.

   Canon Sixteenth. Of him who has a lawful wife, and takes another beside
   her.

   Canon Seventeenth. Of a free-born woman, and her duties. Of midwives,
   and of the separation of men from women. Of virgins, that they should
   cover their faces and their heads.

   Canon Eighteenth. Of women in childbed, and of midwives again.

   Canon Nineteenth. Of catechumens, and the ordinance of Baptism and the
   Missa.

   Canon Twentieth. Of the fast the six days, and of that of Lent.

   Canon Twenty-first. Of the daily assembling of priests and people in
   the church.

   Canon Twenty-second. Of the week of the Jews' passover, wherein joy
   shall be put away, and of what is eaten therein; and of him who, being
   brought up abroad, is ignorant of the Calendar. [2079]

   Canon Twenty-third. Of doctrine, that it should be continuous, greater
   than the sea, and that its words ought to be fulfilled by deeds.

   Canon Twenty-fourth. Of the bishop's visitation of the sick; and that
   if an infirm man has prayed in the church, and has a house, he should
   go to him.

   Canon Twenty-fifth. Of the procurator appointed for the sick, and of
   the bishop, and the times of prayer.

   Canon Twenty-sixth. Of the hearing of the word in church, and of
   praying in it.

   Canon Twenty-seventh. Of him who does not come to church daily,--let
   him read books; and of prayer at midnight and cock-crowing, and of the
   washing of hands at the time of any prayer.

   Canon Twenty-eighth. That none of the believers should taste anything,
   but after he has taken the sacred mysteries, especially in the days of
   fasting.

   Canon Twenty-ninth. Of the keeping of oblations which are laid upon the
   altar,--that nothing fall into the sacred chalice, and that nothing
   fall from the priests, nor from the boys when they take communion; that
   an evil spirit rule them not, and that no one speak in the protection,
   [2080] except in prayer; and when the oblations of the people cease,
   let psalms be read with all attention, even to the signal of the bell;
   and of the sign of the cross, and the casting of the dust of the altar
   into the pool. [2081]

   Canon Thirtieth. Of catechumens and the like.

   Canon Thirty-first. Of the bishop and presbyter bidding the deacons
   present the communion.

   Canon Thirty-second. Of virgins and widows, that they should pray and
   fast in the church. Let those who are given to the clerical order pray
   according to their judgment. Let not a bishop be bound to fasting but
   with the clergy.  And on account of a feast or supper, let him prepare
   for the poor. [2082]

   Canon Thirty-third. Of the Atalmsas (the oblation), which they shall
   present for those who are dead, that it be not done on the Lord's day.

   Canon Thirty-fourth. That no one speak much, nor make a clamour; and of
   the entrance of the saints into the mansions of the faithful.

   Canon Thirty-fifth. Of a deacon present at a feast at which there is a
   presbyter present,--let him do his part in prayer and the breaking of
   bread for a blessing, and not for the body; and of the discharge of
   widows.

   Canon Thirty-sixth. Of the first-fruits of the earth, and the first
   dedication of them; and of presses, oil, honey, milk, wool, and the
   like, which may be offered to the bishop for his blessing.

   Canon Thirty-seventh. As often as a bishop takes of the sacred
   mysteries, let the deacons and presbyters be gathered together, clothed
   in white robes, brilliant in the view of all the people; and in like
   manner with a reader.

   Canon Thirty-eighth. Of the night on which our Lord Jesus Christ rose.
   That no one shall sleep on that night, and wash himself with water; and
   a declaration concerning such a one; and a declaration concerning him
   who sins after baptism, and of things lawful and unlawful.

   The sacred canons of the holy patriarch Hippolytus, the first patriarch
   of the great city of Rome, [2083] which he composed, are ended; and the
   number of them is thirty-eight canons. May the Lord help us to keep
   them. And to God be glory for ever, and on us be His mercy for ever.
   Amen.
     

   [2075] De Magistris, Acta Martyrum ad Ostia Tiberina, Rome, 1795, fol.
   Append., p. 478. [Bunsen, vol. ii. p. 302.]

   [2076] [Ad proferendum sancte. A very primitive token.]

   [2077] [Note this mild excommunication of primitive ages.]

   [2078] Ordinatio missæ. [Missa. See note 6, p, 256, supra.]

   [2079] Connection, textum.

   [2080] Sanctuary [Guettée, p. 424. Within the chancel-rails.]

   [2081] [Bells first used in the fourth century by Paulinus in
   Campania.]

   [2082] And of the preparing a table for the poor.

   [2083] [A very strange title in many respects. But see p. 239, supra.]
     

   Elucidations.

   ------------------------

   I.

   (The God-bearing Mary, p. 242.)

   "This name" (theotokos), says Pearson, "was first in use in the Greek
   Church, which, delighting in the happy compositions of that language,
   so called the Blessed Virgin; from which the Latins, in imitation,
   styled her Virginem Deiparam," etc....Yet those ancient Greeks which
   call the Virgin theotokos, did not call her metera tou Theou, "Mother
   of God." This was very different to a pious ear, and rests on no
   synodical authority. The very learned notes of Pearson, On the Creed,
   pp. 297, 299, should by all means be consulted.  Leo of Rome, called
   "the Great," seems to have coined the less orthodox expression, relying
   on Holy Scripture, indeed, in the salutation of Elisabeth (Luke i. 43).
   This term has been sadly abused for Mariolatry.

   II.

   (Synaxis, p. 257.)

   It seems to me worth while to quote a few words from the new and
   critical edition of Leighton's Works, which should be consulted for
   fuller information. [2084] The editor says:  "Leighton uses a word for
   the Holy Communion which is worth noting, because it is rarely used by
   Western theologians." The word Synaxis is but a Christianized form of
   the word Synagogue; but, like the word koinonia, it points to Christ's
   mystical body,--"gathering together in one the children of God."
   Synaxis = sunagei eis hen. It sums up the idea, "We, being many, are
   one Bread and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread."
   Compare John xi. 52 and 1 Cor. x. 15.

   St. Chrysostom calls the Synaxis phrikodestate, which is a very
   different thing from maxime tremenda, as applied to the modern "Mass,"
   in behalf of which it is quoted. For Chrysostom applies it to the
   participation of the "Synaxis," and not to the "oblation," much less to
   the "Host" as an object of adoration, of which he never heard or
   dreamed. He calls "the Synaxis" Shudderful (to borrow a word from the
   Germans), because the unworthy recipient, in the Synaxis, eats and
   drinks his own condemnation. [2085] One must ever be on his guard
   against the subtlety which reads into the Fathers modern ideas under
   ancient phrases. [2086] Precisely so Holy Scripture itself is
   paraphrased into Trent doctrine, as in Acts xiii. 2 the Louvain
   versionists rendered the text, "And while they offered the sacrifice of
   the Mass and fasted."
     

   [2084] Leighton, Works, edited by West, of Nairn, vol. vi. p. 243,
   note. London, Longmans, 1870.

   [2085] 1 Cor. xi. 29-34.  Chrysostom evidently has in view the
   apostle's argument, based on the Communion as a Synaxis, and not on its
   hierurgic aspects.

   [2086] Mendham's Literary Policy of the Church of Rome (passim), and
   also the old work of James, On the Corruption of Scripture, Councils,
   and Fathers, a new edition.  London: Parker, 1843.