Chapter I.--On the Inspiration of Holy Scripture, and How the Same is
   to be Read and Understood, and What is the Reason of the Uncertainty in
   it; and of the Impossibility or Irrationality of Certain Things in it,
   Taken According to the Letter.

   (The translation from the Greek is designedly literal, that the
   difference between the original and the paraphrase of Rufinus may be
   more clearly seen.)

   1.  Since, in our investigation of matters of such importance, not
   satisfied with the common opinions, and with the clear evidence of
   visible things, [2812] we take in addition, for the proof of our
   statements, testimonies from what are believed by us to be divine
   writings, viz., from that which is called the Old Testament, and that
   which is styled the New, and endeavour by reason to confirm our faith;
   and as we have not yet spoken of the Scriptures as divine, come and let
   us, as if by way of an epitome, treat of a few points respecting them,
   laying down those reasons which lead us to regard them as divine
   writings.  And before making use of the words of the writings
   themselves, and of the things which are exhibited in them, we must make
   the following statement regarding Moses and Jesus Christ,--the lawgiver
   of the Hebrews, and the Introducer of the saving doctrines according to
   Christianity.  For, although there have been very many legislators
   among the Greeks and Barbarians, and teachers who announced opinions
   which professed to be the truth, we have heard of no legislator who was
   able to imbue other nations with a zeal for the reception of his words;
   and although those who professed to philosophize about truth brought
   forward a great apparatus of apparent logical demonstration, no one has
   been able to impress what was deemed by him the truth upon other
   nations, or even on any number of persons worth mentioning in a single
   nation.  And yet not only would the legislators have liked to enforce
   those laws which appeared to be good, if possible, upon the whole human
   race, but the teachers also to have spread what they imagined to be
   truth everywhere throughout the world.  But as they were unable to call
   men of other languages and from many nations to observe their laws, and
   accept their teaching, they did not at all attempt to do this,
   considering not unwisely the impossibility of such a result happening
   to them.  Whereas all Greece, and the barbarous part of our world,
   contains innumerable zealots, who have deserted the laws of their
   fathers and the established gods, for the observance of the laws of
   Moses and the discipleship of the words of Jesus Christ; although those
   who clave to the law of Moses were hated by the worshippers of images,
   and those who accepted the words of Jesus Christ were exposed, in
   addition, to the danger of death.

   2.  And if we observe how powerful the word has become in a very few
   years, notwithstanding that against those who acknowledged Christianity
   conspiracies were formed, and some of them on its account put to death,
   and others of them lost their property, and that, notwithstanding the
   small number of its teachers, [2813] it was preached everywhere
   throughout the world, so that Greeks and Barbarians, wise and foolish,
   gave themselves up to the worship that is through Jesus, [2814] we have
   no difficulty in saying that the result is beyond any human power,
   [2815] Jesus having taught with all authority and persuasiveness that
   His word should not be overcome; so that we may rightly regard as
   oracular responses [2816] those utterances of His, such as, "Ye shall
   be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony
   against them and the Gentiles;" [2817] and, "Many shall say unto Me in
   that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten in Thy name, and drunk in Thy
   name, and in Thy name cast out devils?  And I shall say unto them,
   Depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you." [2818]   Now
   it was perhaps (once) probable that, in uttering these words, He spoke
   them in vain, so that they were not true; but when that which was
   delivered with so much authority has come to pass, it shows that God,
   having really become man, delivered to men the doctrines of salvation.
   [2819]

   3.  And what need is there to mention also that it was predicted of
   Christ [2820] that then would the rulers fail from Judah, and the
   leaders from his thighs, [2821] when He came for whom it is reserved
   (the kingdom, namely); and that the expectation of the Gentiles should
   dwell in the land? [2822]   For it is clearly manifest from the
   history, and from what is seen at the present day, that from the times
   of Jesus there were no longer any who were called kings of the Jews;
   [2823] all those Jewish institutions on which they prided themselves--I
   mean those arrangements relating to the temple and the altar, and the
   offering of the service, and the robes of the high priest having been
   destroyed.  For the prophecy was fulfilled which said, "The children of
   Israel shall sit many days, there being no king, nor ruler, nor
   sacrifice, nor altar, nor priesthood, nor responses." [2824]   And
   these predictions we employ to answer those who, in their perplexity as
   to the words spoken in Genesis by Jacob to Judah, assert that the
   Ethnarch, [2825] being of the race of Judah, is the ruler of the
   people, and that there will not fail some of his seed, until the advent
   of that Christ whom they figure to their imagination.  But if "the
   children of Israel are to sit many days without a king, or ruler, or
   altar, or priesthood, or responses;" and if, since the temple was
   destroyed, there exists no longer sacrifice, nor altar, nor priesthood,
   it is manifest that the ruler has failed out of Judah, and the leader
   from between his thighs.  And since the prediction declares that "the
   ruler shall not fail from Judah, and the leader from between his
   thighs, until what is reserved for Him shall come," it is manifest that
   He is come to whom (belongs) what is reserved--the expectation of the
   Gentiles.  And this is clear from the multitude of the heathen who have
   believed on God through Jesus Christ.

   4.  And in the song in Deuteronomy, [2826] also, it is prophetically
   made known that, on account of the sins of the former people, there was
   to be an election of foolish nations, which has been brought to pass by
   no other than by Jesus.  "For they," He says, "moved Me to jealousy
   with that which is not God, they have provoked Me to anger with their
   idols; and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a
   people, and will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation." [2827]
   Now it is possible to understand with all clearness how the Hebrews,
   who are said to have moved God to jealousy by that which is not God,
   and to have provoked Him to anger by their idols, were (themselves)
   aroused to jealousy by that which was not a people--the foolish nation,
   namely, which God chose by the advent of Jesus Christ and His
   disciples.  We see, indeed, "our calling, that not many wise men after
   the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble (are called); but God hath
   chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and base
   things, and things that are despised, hath God chosen, and things that
   are not, to bring to nought the things which formerly existed;" [2828]
   and let not the Israel according to the flesh, which is called by the
   apostle "flesh," boast in the presence of God.

   5.  And what are we to say regarding the prophecies of Christ in the
   Psalms, there being a certain ode with the superscription "For the
   Beloved," [2829] whose" tongue" is said to be the "pen of a ready
   writer, who is fairer than the sons of men," since "grace was poured on
   His lips?"  For a proof that grace was poured on His lips is this, that
   although the period of His teaching was short--for He taught somewhere
   about a year and a few months--the world has been filled with his
   teaching, and with the worship of God (established) through Him.  For
   there arose "in His days righteousness and abundance of peace," [2830]
   which abides until the consummation, which has been called the taking
   away of the moon; and He continues "ruling from sea to sea, and from
   the rivers to the ends of the earth." [2831]   And to the house of
   David has been given a sign:  for the Virgin bore, and was pregnant,
   [2832] and brought forth a son, and His name is Emmanuel, which is,
   "God with us;" and as the same prophet says, the prediction has been
   fulfilled, "God (is) with us; know it, O nations, and be overcome; ye
   who are strong, be vanquished:" [2833]   for we of the heathen have
   been overcome and vanquished, we who have been taken by the grace of
   His teaching.  The place also of His birth has been foretold in (the
   prophecies of) Micah:  "For thou, Bethlehem," he says, "land of Judah,
   art by no means the least among the rulers of Judah; for out of thee
   shall come forth a Ruler, who shall rule My people Israel." [2834]
   And according to Daniel, seventy weeks were fulfilled until (the coming
   of) Christ the Ruler. [2835]   And He came, who, according to Job,
   [2836] has subdued the great fish, [2837] and has given power to His
   true disciples to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and all the power
   of the enemy, [2838] without sustaining any injury from them.  And let
   one notice also the universal advent of the apostles sent by Jesus to
   announce the Gospel, and he will see both that the undertaking was
   beyond human power, and that the commandment came from God.  And if we
   examine how men, on hearing new doctrines, and strange words, yielded
   themselves up to these teachers, being overcome, amid the very desire
   to plot against them, by a divine power that watched over these
   (teachers), we shall not be incredulous as to whether they also wrought
   miracles, God bearing witness to their words both by signs, and
   wonders, and divers miracles.

   6.  And while we thus briefly [2839] demonstrate the deity of Christ,
   and (in so doing) make use of the prophetic declarations regarding Him,
   we demonstrate at the same time that the writings which prophesied of
   Him were divinely inspired; and that those documents which announced
   His coming and His doctrine were given forth with all power and
   authority, and that on this account they obtained the election from the
   Gentiles. [2840]   We must say, also, that the divinity of the
   prophetic declarations, and the spiritual nature of the law of Moses,
   shone forth after the advent of Christ.  For before the advent of
   Christ it was not altogether possible to exhibit manifest proofs of the
   divine inspiration of the ancient Scripture; whereas His coming led
   those who might suspect the law and the prophets not to be divine, to
   the clear conviction that they were composed by (the aid of) heavenly
   grace.  And he who reads the words of the prophets with care and
   attention, feeling by the very perusal the traces of the divinity
   [2841] that is in them, will be led by his own emotions to believe that
   those words which have been deemed to be the words of God are not the
   compositions of men.  The light, moreover, which was contained in the
   law of Moses, but which had been concealed by a veil, shone forth at
   the advent of Jesus, the veil being taken away, and those blessings,
   the shadow of which was contained in the letter, coming forth gradually
   to the knowledge (of men).

   7.  It would be tedious now to enumerate the most ancient prophecies
   respecting each future event, in order that the doubter, being
   impressed by their divinity, may lay aside all hesitation and
   distraction, and devote himself with his whole soul to the words of
   God.  But if in every part of the Scriptures the superhuman element of
   thought [2842] does not seem to present itself to the uninstructed,
   that is not at all wonderful for, with respect to the works of that
   providence which embraces the whole world, some show with the utmost
   clearness that they are works of providence, while others are so
   concealed as to seem to furnish ground for unbelief with respect to
   that God who orders all things with unspeakable skill and power.  For
   the artistic plan [2843] of a providential Ruler is not so evident in
   those matters belonging to the earth, as in the case of the sun, and
   moon, and stars; and not so clear in what relates to human occurrences,
   as it is in the souls and bodies of animals,--the object and reason of
   the impulses, and phantasies and natures of animals, and the structure
   of their bodies, being carefully ascertained by those who attend to
   these things. [2844]   But as (the doctrine of) providence is not at
   all weakened [2845] (on account of those things which are not
   understood) in the eyes of those who have once honestly accepted it, so
   neither is the divinity of Scripture, which extends to the whole of it,
   (lost) on account of the inability of our weakness to discover in every
   expression the hidden splendour of the doctrines veiled in common and
   unattractive phraseology. [2846]   For we have the treasure in earthen
   vessels, that the excellency of the power of God may shine forth, and
   that it may not be deemed to proceed from us (who are but) human
   beings.  For if the hackneyed [2847] methods of demonstration (common)
   among men, contained in the books (of the Bible), had been successful
   in producing conviction; then our faith would rightly have been
   supposed to rest on the wisdom of men, and not on the power of God; but
   now it is manifest to everyone who lifts up his eyes, that the word and
   preaching have not prevailed among the multitude "by persuasive words
   of wisdom, but by demonstration of the Spirit and of power." [2848]
   Wherefore, since a celestial or even a super-celestial power compels us
   to worship the only Creator, let us leave the doctrine of the beginning
   of Christ, i.e., the elements, [2849] and endeavour to go on to
   perfection, in order that the wisdom spoken to the perfect may be
   spoken to us also.  For he who possesses it promises to speak wisdom
   among them that are perfect, but another wisdom than that of this
   world, and of the rulers of this world, which is brought to nought.
   And this wisdom will be distinctly stamped [2850] upon us, and will
   produce a revelation of the mystery that was kept silent in the eternal
   ages, [2851] but now has been manifested through the prophetic
   Scriptures, and the appearance of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to
   whom be glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

   8.  Having spoken thus briefly [2852] on the subject of the divine
   inspiration of the holy Scriptures, it is necessary to proceed to the
   (consideration of the) manner in which they are to be read and
   understood, seeing numerous errors have been committed in consequence
   of the method in which the holy documents [2853] ought to be examined;
   [2854] not having been discovered by the multitude.  For both the
   hardened in heart, and the ignorant persons [2855] belonging to the
   circumcision, have not believed on our Saviour, thinking that they are
   following the language of the prophecies respecting Him, and not
   perceiving in a manner palpable to their senses [2856] that He had
   proclaimed liberty to the captives, nor that He had built up what they
   truly consider the city of God, nor cut off "the chariots of Ephraim,
   and the horse from Jerusalem," [2857] nor eaten butter and honey, and,
   before knowing or preferring the evil, had selected the good. [2858]
   And thinking, moreover, that it was prophesied that the wolf--the
   four-footed animal--was to feed with the lamb, and the leopard to lie
   down with the kid, and the calf and bull and lion to feed together,
   being led by a little child, and that the ox and bear were to pasture
   together, their young ones growing up together, and that the lion was
   to eat straw like the ox: [2859]   seeing none of these things visibly
   accomplished during the advent of Him who is believed by us to be
   Christ, they did not accept our Lord Jesus; but, as having called
   Himself Christ improperly, [2860] they crucified Him.  And those
   belonging to heretical sects reading this (statement), "A fire has been
   kindled in Mine anger;" [2861] and this, "I am a jealous God, visiting
   the iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
   fourth generation;" [2862] and this, "I repent of having anointed Saul
   to be king;" [2863] and this, "I am a God that maketh peace, and
   createth evil;" [2864] and, among others, this, "There is not
   wickedness in the city which the Lord hath not done;" [2865] and again
   this, "Evils came down from the Lord upon the gates of Jerusalem;"
   [2866] and, "An evil spirit from the Lord plagued Saul;" [2867] and
   countless other passages like these--they have not ventured to
   disbelieve these as the Scriptures of God; but believing them to be the
   (words) of the Demiurge, whom the Jews worship, they thought that as
   the Demiurge was an imperfect and unbenevolent God, the Saviour had
   come to announce a more perfect Deity, who, they say, is not the
   Demiurge, being of different opinions regarding Him; and having once
   departed from the Demiurge, who is the only uncreated God, they have
   given themselves up to fictions, inventing to themselves hypotheses,
   according to which they imagine that there are some things which are
   visible, and certain other things which are not visible, all which are
   the fancies of their own minds.  And yet, indeed, the more simple among
   those who profess to belong to the Church have supposed that there is
   no deity greater than the Demiurge, being right in so thinking, while
   they imagine regarding Him such things as would not be believed of the
   most savage and unjust of mankind.

   9.  Now the cause, in all the points previously enumerated, of the
   false opinions, and of the impious statements or ignorant assertions
   [2868] about God, appears to be nothing else than the not understanding
   the Scripture according to its spiritual meaning, but the
   interpretation of it agreeably to the mere letter.  And therefore, to
   those who believe that the sacred books are not the compositions of
   men, but that they were composed by inspiration [2869] of the Holy
   Spirit, agreeably to the will of the Father of all things through Jesus
   Christ, and that they have come down to us, we must point out the ways
   (of interpreting them) which appear (correct) to us, who cling to the
   standard [2870] of the heavenly Church of Jesus Christ according to the
   succession of the apostles.  Now, that there are certain mystical
   economies made known by the holy Scriptures, all--even the most simple
   of those who adhere to the word--have believed; but what these are,
   candid and modest individuals confess that they know not.  If, then,
   one were to be perplexed about the intercourse of Lot with his
   daughters, and about the two wives of Abraham, and the two sisters
   married to Jacob, and the two handmaids who bore him children, they can
   return no other answer than this, that these are mysteries not
   understood by us.  Nay, also, when the (description of the) fitting out
   of the tabernacle is read, believing that what is written is a type,
   [2871] they seek to adapt what they can to each particular related
   about the tabernacle,--not being wrong so far as regards their belief
   that the tabernacle is a type of something, but erring sometimes in
   adapting the description of that of which the tabernacle is a type, to
   some special thing in a manner worthy of Scripture.  And all the
   history that is considered to tell of marriages, or the begetting of
   children, or of wars, or any histories whatever that are in circulation
   among the multitude, they declare to be types; but of what in each
   individual instance, partly owing to their habits not being thoroughly
   exercised--partly, too, owing to their precipitation--sometimes, even
   when an individual does happen to be well trained and clear-sighted,
   owing to the excessive difficulty of discovering things on the part of
   men,--the nature of each particular regarding these (types) is not
   clearly ascertained.

   10.  And what need is there to speak of the prophecies, which we all
   know to be filled with enigmas and dark sayings?  And if we come to the
   Gospels, the exact understanding of these also, as being the mind of
   Christ, requires the grace that was given to him who said, "But we have
   the mind of Christ, that we might know the things freely given to us by
   God.  Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
   teacheth, but which the Spirit teacheth." [2872]   And who, on reading
   the revelations made to John, would not be amazed at the unspeakable
   mysteries therein concealed, and which are evident (even) to him who
   does not comprehend what is written?  And to what person, skilful in
   investigating words, would the Epistles of the Apostles seem to be
   clear and easy of understanding, since even in them there are countless
   numbers of most profound ideas, which, (issuing forth) as by an
   aperture, admit of no rapid comprehension? [2873]   And therefore,
   since these things are so, and since innumerable individuals fall into
   mistakes, it is not safe in reading (the Scriptures) to declare that
   one easily understands what needs the key of knowledge, which the
   Saviour declares is with the lawyers.  And let those answer who will
   not allow that the truth was with these before the advent of Christ,
   how the key of knowledge is said by our Lord Jesus Christ to be with
   those who, as they allege, had not the books which contain the secrets
   [2874] of knowledge, and perfect mysteries. [2875]   For His words run
   thus:  "Woe unto you, ye lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of
   knowledge:  ye have not entered in yourselves, and them that were
   entering in ye hindered." [2876]

   11.  The way, then, as it appears to us, in which we ought to deal with
   the Scriptures, and extract from them their meaning, is the following,
   which has been ascertained from the Scriptures themselves.  By Solomon
   in the Proverbs we find some such rule as this enjoined respecting the
   divine doctrines of Scripture: [2877]   "And do thou portray them in a
   threefold manner, in counsel and knowledge, to answer words of truth to
   them who propose them to thee." [2878]   The individual ought, then, to
   portray the ideas of holy Scripture in a threefold manner upon his own
   soul; in order that the simple man may be edified by the "flesh," as it
   were, of the Scripture, for so we name the obvious sense; while he who
   has ascended a certain way (may be edified) by the "soul," as it were.
   The perfect man, again, and he who resembles those spoken of by the
   apostle, when he says, "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect,
   but not the wisdom of the world, nor of the rulers of this world, who
   come to nought; but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, the hidden
   wisdom, which God hath ordained before the ages, unto our glory,"
   [2879]   (may receive edification) from the spiritual law, which has a
   shadow of good things to come.  For as man consists of body, and soul,
   and spirit, so in the same way does Scripture, which has been arranged
   to be given by God for the salvation of men.  And therefore we deduce
   this also from a book which is despised by some--The Shepherd--in
   respect of the command given to Hermas to write two books, and after so
   doing to announce to the presbyters of the Church what he had learned
   from the Spirit.  The words are as follows:  "You will write two books,
   and give one to Clement, and one to Grapte.  And Grapte shall admonish
   the widows and the orphans, and Clement will send to the cities abroad,
   while you will announce to the presbyters of the Church."  Now Grapte,
   who admonishes the widows and the orphans, is the mere letter (of
   Scripture), which admonishes those who are yet children in soul, and
   not able to call God their Father, and who are on that account styled
   orphans,--admonishing, moreover, those who no longer have an unlawful
   bridegroom, [2880] but who remain widows, because they have not yet
   become worthy of the (heavenly) Bridegroom; while Clement, who is
   already beyond the letter, is said to send what is written to the
   cities abroad, as if we were to call these the "souls," who are above
   (the influence of) bodily (affections) and degraded [2881] ideas,--the
   disciple of the Spirit himself being enjoined to make known, no longer
   by letters, but by living words, to the presbyters of the whole Church
   of God, who have become grey [2882] through wisdom.

   12.  But as there are certain passages of Scripture which do not at all
   contain the "corporeal" sense, as we shall show in the following
   (paragraphs), there are also places where we must seek only for the
   "soul," as it were, and "spirit" of Scripture.  And perhaps on this
   account the water-vessels containing two or three firkins a-piece are
   said to lie for the purification of the Jews, as we read in the Gospel
   according to John:  the expression darkly intimating, with respect to
   those who (are called) by the apostle "Jews" secretly, that they are
   purified by the word of Scripture, receiving sometimes two firkins,
   i.e., so to speak, the "psychical" and "spiritual" sense; and sometimes
   three firkins, since some have, in addition to those already mentioned,
   also the "corporeal" sense, which is capable of (producing)
   edification.  And six water-vessels are reasonably (appropriate) to
   those who are purified in the world, which was made in six days--the
   perfect number.  That the first "sense," then, is profitable in this
   respect, that it is capable of imparting edification, is testified by
   the multitudes of genuine and simple believers; while of that
   interpretation which is referred back to the "soul," there is an
   illustration in Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians.  The
   expression is, "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth
   out the corn;" [2883] to which he adds, "Doth God take care of oxen? or
   saith He it altogether for our sakes?  For our sakes, no doubt, this
   was written:  that he that plougheth should plough in hope, and that he
   who thresheth, in hope of partaking." [2884]   And there are numerous
   interpretations adapted to the multitude which are in circulation, and
   which edify those who are unable to understand profounder meanings, and
   which have somewhat the same character.

   13.  But the interpretation is "spiritual," when one is able to show of
   what heavenly things the Jews "according to the flesh" served as an
   example and a shadow, and of what future blessings the law contains a
   shadow.  And, generally, we must investigate, according to the
   apostolic promise, "the wisdom in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which
   God ordained before the world for the glory" of the just, which "none
   of the princes of this world knew." [2885]   And the same apostle says
   somewhere, after referring to certain events mentioned as occurring in
   Exodus and Numbers, "that these things happened to them figuratively,
   but that they were written on our account, on whom the ends of the
   world are come." [2886]   And he gives an opportunity for ascertaining
   of what things these were patterns, when he says:  "For they drank of
   the spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ."
   [2887]   And in another Epistle, when sketching the various matters
   relating to the tabernacle, he used the words:  "Thou shalt make
   everything according to the pattern showed thee in the mount." [2888]
   Moreover, in the Epistle to the Galatians, as if upbraiding those who
   think that they read the law, and yet do not understand it, judging
   that those do not understand it who do not reflect that allegories are
   contained under what is written, he says:  "Tell me, ye that desire to
   be under the law, do ye not hear the law?  For it is written, Abraham
   had two sons; the one by the bond-maid, the other by the free woman.
   But he who was by the bond-maid was born according to the flesh; but he
   of the free woman was by promise.  Which things are an allegory: [2889]
     for these are the two covenants," and so on.  Now we must carefully
   observe each word employed by him.  He says:  "Ye who desire to be
   under the law," not "Ye that are under the law;" and, "Do ye not
   hearthe law?"--"hearing" being understood to mean "comprehending" and
   "knowing."  And in the Epistle to the Colossians, briefly abridging the
   meaning of the whole legislation, he says:  "Let no man therefore judge
   you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a festival, or of a new
   moon, or of Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come." [2890]
   Moreover, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, discoursing of those who
   belong to the circumcision, he writes:  "who serve for an ensample and
   shadow of heavenly things." [2891]   Now it is probable that, from
   these illustrations, those will entertain no doubt with respect to the
   five books of Moses, who have once given in their adhesion to the
   apostle, as divinely inspired; [2892] but do you wish to know, with
   regard to the rest of the history, if it also happened as a pattern?
   We must note, then, the expression in the Epistle to the Romans, "I
   have left to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to
   Baal," [2893] quoted from the third book of Kings, which Paul has
   understood as equivalent (in meaning) to those who are Israelites
   according to election, because not only were the Gentiles benefited by
   the advent of Christ, but also certain of the race of God. [2894]

   14.  This being the state of the case, we have to sketch what seem to
   us to be the marks of the (true) understanding of Scriptures.  And, in
   the first place, this must be pointed out, that the object of the
   Spirit, which by the providence of God, through the Word who was in the
   beginning with God, illuminated the ministers of truth, the prophets
   and apostles, was especially (the communication) of ineffable mysteries
   regarding the affairs of men (now by men I mean those souls that make
   use of bodies), in order that he who is capable of instruction may by
   investigation, and by devoting himself to the study of the profundities
   of meaning contained in the words, become a participator of all the
   doctrines of his counsel.  And among those matters which relate to
   souls (who cannot otherwise obtain perfection apart from the rich and
   wise truth of God), the (doctrines) belonging to God and His
   only-begotten Son are necessarily laid down as primary, viz., of what
   nature He is, and in what manner He is the Son of God, and what are the
   causes of His descending even to (the assumption of) human flesh, and
   of complete humanity; and what, also, is the operation of this (Son),
   and upon whom and when exercised.  And it was necessary also that the
   subject of kindred beings, and other rational creatures, both those who
   are divine and those who have fallen from blessedness, together with
   the reasons of their fall, should be contained in the divine teaching;
   and also that of the diversities of souls, and of the origin of these
   diversities, and of the nature of the world, and the cause of its
   existence.  We must learn also the origin of the great and terrible
   wickedness which overspreads the earth, and whether it is confined to
   this earth only, or prevails elsewhere.  Now, while these and similar
   objects were present to the Spirit, who enlightened the souls of the
   holy ministers of the truth, there was a second object, for the sake of
   those who were unable to endure the fatigue of investigating matters so
   important, viz., to conceal the doctrine relating to the previously
   mentioned subjects, in expressions containing a narrative which
   conveyed an announcement regarding the things of the visible creation,
   [2895] the creation of man, and the successive descendants of the first
   men until they became numerous; and other histories relating the acts
   of just men, and the sins occasionally committed by these same men as
   being human beings, and the wicked deeds, both of unchastity and vice,
   committed by sinful and ungodly men.  And what is most remarkable, by
   the history of wars, and of the victors, and the vanquished, certain
   mysteries are indicated to those who are able to test these
   statements.  And more wonderful still, the laws of truth are predicted
   by the written legislation;--all these being described in a connected
   series, with a power which is truly in keeping with the wisdom of God.
   For it was intended that the covering also of the spiritual truths--I
   mean the "bodily" part of Scripture--should not be without profit in
   many cases, but should be capable of improving the multitude, according
   to their capacity.

   15.  But since, if the usefulness of the legislation, and the sequence
   and beauty [2896] of the history, were universally evident of itself,
   [2897] we should not believe that any other thing could be understood
   in the Scriptures save what was obvious, the word of God has arranged
   that certain stumbling-blocks, as it were, and offences, and
   impossibilities, should be introduced into the midst of the law and the
   history, in order that we may not, through being drawn away in all
   directions by the merely attractive nature of the language, [2898]
   either altogether fall away from the (true) doctrines, as learning
   nothing worthy of God, or, by not departing from the letter, come to
   the knowledge of nothing more divine.  And this also we must know, that
   the principal aim being to announce the "spiritual" connection in those
   things that are done, and that ought to be done, where the Word found
   that things done according to the history could be adapted to these
   mystical senses, He made use of them, concealing from the multitude the
   deeper meaning; but where, in the narrative of the development of
   super-sensual things, [2899] there did not follow the performance of
   those certain events, which was already indicated by the mystical
   meaning, the Scripture interwove in the history (the account of) some
   event that did not take place, sometimes what could not have happened;
   sometimes what could, but did not.  And sometimes a few words are
   interpolated which are not true in their literal acceptation, [2900]
   and sometimes a larger number.  And a similar practice also is to be
   noticed with regard to the legislation, in which is often to be found
   what is useful in itself, and appropriate to the times of the
   legislation; and sometimes also what does not appear to be of utility;
   and at other times impossibilities are recorded for the sake of the
   more skilful and inquisitive, in order that they may give themselves to
   the toil of investigating what is written, and thus attain to a
   becoming conviction of the manner in which a meaning worthy of God must
   be sought out in such subjects.

   16.  It was not only, however, with the (Scriptures composed) before
   the advent (of Christ) that the Spirit thus dealt; but as being the
   same Spirit, and (proceeding) from the one God, He did the same thing
   both with the evangelists and the apostles,--as even these do not
   contain throughout a pure history of events, which are interwoven
   indeed according to the letter, but which did not actually occur.
   [2901]   Nor even do the law and the commandments wholly convey what is
   agreeable to reason.  For who that has understanding will suppose that
   the first, and second, and third day, and the evening and the morning,
   existed without a sun, and moon, and stars? and that the first day was,
   as it were, also without a sky?  And who is so foolish as to suppose
   that God, after the manner of a husbandman, planted a paradise in Eden,
   towards the east, and placed in it a tree of life, visible and
   palpable, so that one tasting of the fruit by the bodily teeth obtained
   life? and again, that one was a partaker of good and evil by
   masticating what was taken from the tree?  And if God is said to walk
   in the paradise in the evening, and Adam to hide himself under a tree,
   I do not suppose that anyone doubts that these things figuratively
   indicate certain mysteries, the history having taken place in
   appearance, and not literally. [2902]   Cain also, when going forth
   from the presence of God, certainly appears to thoughtful men as likely
   to lead the reader to inquire what is the presence of God, and what is
   the meaning of going out from Him.  And what need is there to say more,
   since those who are not altogether blind can collect countless
   instances of a similar kind recorded as having occurred, but which did
   not literally [2903] take place?  Nay, the Gospels themselves are
   filled with the same kind of narratives; e.g., the devil leading Jesus
   up into a high mountain, in order to show him from thence the kingdoms
   of the whole world, and the glory of them.  For who is there among
   those who do not read such accounts carelessly, that would not condemn
   those who think that with the eye of the body--which requires a lofty
   height in order that the parts lying (immediately) under and adjacent
   may be seen--the kingdoms of the Persians, and Scythians, and Indians,
   and Parthians, were beheld, and the manner in which their princes are
   glorified among men?  And the attentive reader may notice in the
   Gospels innumerable other passages like these, so that he will be
   convinced that in the histories that are literally recorded,
   circumstances that did not occur are inserted.

   17.  And if we come to the legislation of Moses, many of the laws
   manifest the irrationality, and others the impossibility, of their
   literal [2904] observance.  The irrationality (in this), that the
   people are forbidden to eat vultures, although no one even in the
   direst famines was (ever) driven by want to have recourse to this bird;
   and that children eight days old, which are uncircumcised, are ordered
   to be exterminated from among their people, it being necessary, if the
   law were to be carried out at all literally with regard to these, that
   their fathers, or those with whom they are brought up, should be
   commanded to be put to death.  Now the Scripture says:  "Every male
   that is uncircumcised, who shall not be circumcised on the eighth day,
   shall be cut off from among his people." [2905]   And if you wish to
   see impossibilities contained in the legislation, let us observe that
   the goat-stag is one of those animals that cannot exist, and yet Moses
   commands us to offer it as being a clean beast; whereas a griffin,
   which is not recorded ever to have been subdued by man, the lawgiver
   forbids to be eaten.  Nay, he who carefully considers (the famous
   injunction relating to) the Sabbath, "Ye shall sit each one in your
   dwellings:  let no one go out from his place on the seventh day,"
   [2906] will deem it impossible to be literally observed:  for no living
   being is able to sit throughout a whole day, and remain without moving
   from a sitting position.  And therefore those who belong to the
   circumcision, and all who desire that no meaning should be exhibited,
   save the literal one, do not investigate at all such subjects as those
   of the goat-stag and griffin and vulture, but indulge in foolish talk
   on certain points, multiplying words and adducing tasteless [2907]
   traditions; as, for example, with regard to the Sabbath, saying that
   two thousand cubits is each one's limit. [2908]   Others, again, among
   whom is Dositheus the Samaritan, condemning such an interpretation,
   think that in the position in which a man is found on the Sabbath-day,
   he is to remain until evening.  Moreover, the not carrying of a burden
   on the Sabbath-day is an impossibility; and therefore the Jewish
   teachers have fallen into countless absurdities, [2909] saying that a
   shoe of such a kind was a burden, but not one of another kind; and that
   a sandal which had nails was a burden, but not one that was without
   them; and in like manner what was borne on one shoulder (was a load),
   but not that which was carried on both.

   18.  And if we go to the Gospel and institute a similar examination,
   what would be more irrational than (to take literally the injunction),
   "Salute no man by the way," [2910] which simple persons think the
   Saviour enjoined on the apostles?  The command, moreover, that the
   right cheek should be smitten, is most incredible, since everyone who
   strikes, unless he happen to have some bodily defect, [2911] smites the
   left cheek with his right hand.  And it is impossible to take
   (literally, the statement) in the Gospel about the "offending" of the
   right eye.  For, to grant the possibility of one being "offended" by
   the sense of sight, how, when there are two eyes that see, should the
   blame be laid upon the right eye?  And who is there that, condemning
   himself for having looked upon a woman to lust after her, would
   rationally transfer the blame to the right eye alone, and throw it
   away?  The apostle, moreover, lays down the law, saying, "Is any man
   called, being circumcised?  Let him not become uncircumcised." [2912]
   In the first place, anyone will see that he does not utter these words
   in connection with the subject before him.  For, when laying down
   precepts on marriage and purity, how will it not appear that he has
   introduced these words at random? [2913]   But, in the second place,
   who will say that a man does wrong who endeavours to become
   uncircumcised, if that be possible, on account of the disgrace that is
   considered by the multitude to attach to circumcision.

   All these statements have been made by us, in order to show that the
   design of that divine power which gave us the sacred Scriptures is,
   that we should not receive what is presented by the letter alone (such
   things being sometimes not true in their literal acceptation, but
   absurd and impossible), but that certain things have been introduced
   into the actual history and into the legislation that are useful in
   their literal sense. [2914]

   19.  But that no one may suppose that we assert respecting the whole
   that no history is real [2915] because a certain one is not; and that
   no law is to be literally observed, because a certain one, (understood)
   according to the letter, is absurd or impossible; or that the
   statements regarding the Saviour are not true in a manner perceptible
   to the senses; [2916] or that no commandment and precept of His ought
   to be obeyed;--we have to answer that, with regard to certain things,
   it is perfectly clear to us that the historical account is true; as
   that Abraham was buried in the double cave at Hebron, as also Isaac and
   Jacob, and the wives of each of them; and that Shechem was given as a
   portion to Joseph; [2917] and that Jerusalem is the metropolis of
   Judea, in which the temple of God was built by Solomon; and innumerable
   other statements.  For the passages that are true in their historical
   meaning are much more numerous than those which are interspersed with a
   purely spiritual signification.  And again, who would not say that the
   command which enjoins to "honour thy father and thy mother, that it may
   be well with thee," [2918] is useful, apart from all allegorical
   meaning, [2919] and ought to be observed, the Apostle Paul also having
   employed these very same words?  And what need is there to speak of the
   (prohibitions), "Thou shalt not commit adultery," "Thou shalt not
   kill," "Thou shalt not steal," "Thou shalt not bear false witness?"
   [2920]   And again, there are commandments contained in the Gospel
   which admit of no doubt whether they are to be observed according to
   the letter or not; e.g., that which says, "But I say unto you, Whoever
   is angry with his brother," [2921] and so on.  And again, "But I say
   unto you, Swear not at all." [2922]   "And in the writings of the
   apostle the literal sense is to be retained:  "Warn them that are
   unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient towards
   all men;" [2923] although it is possible for those ambitious of a
   deeper meaning to retain the profundities of the wisdom of God, without
   setting aside the commandment in its literal meaning. [2924]   The
   careful (reader), however, will be in doubt [2925] as to certain
   points, being unable to show without long investigation whether this
   history so deemed literally occurred or not, and whether the literal
   meaning of this law is to be observed or not.  And therefore the exact
   reader must, in obedience to the Saviour's injunction to "search the
   Scriptures," [2926] carefully ascertain in how far the literal meaning
   is true, and in how far impossible; and so far as he can, trace out, by
   means of similar statements, the meaning everywhere scattered through
   Scripture of that which cannot be understood in a literal
   signification.

   20.  Since, therefore, as will be clear to those who read, the
   connection taken literally is impossible, while the sense preferred
   [2927] is not impossible, but even the true one, it must be our object
   to grasp the whole meaning, which connects the account of what is
   literally impossible in an intelligible manner with what is not only
   not impossible, but also historically true, and which is allegorically
   understood, in respect of its not having literally occurred. [2928]
   For, with respect to holy Scripture, our opinion is that the whole of
   it has a "spiritual," but not the whole a "bodily" meaning, because the
   bodily meaning is in many places proved to be impossible.  And
   therefore great attention must be bestowed by the cautious reader on
   the divine books, as being divine writings; the manner of understanding
   which appears to us to be as follows:--The Scriptures relate that God
   chose a certain nation upon the earth, which they call by several
   names.  For the whole of this nation is termed Israel, and also Jacob.
   And when it was divided in the times of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the
   ten tribes related as being subject to him were called Israel; and the
   remaining two, along with the tribe of Levi, being ruled over by the
   descendants of David, were named Judah.  And the whole of the territory
   which the people of this nation inhabited, being given them by God,
   receives the name of Judah, the metropolis of which is Jerusalem,--a
   metropolis, namely, of numerous cities, the names of which lie
   scattered about in many other passages (of Scripture), but are
   enumerated together in the book of Joshua the son of Nun. [2929]

   21.  Such, then, being the state of the case, the apostle, elevating
   our power of discernment (above the letter), says somewhere, "Behold
   Israel after the flesh," [2930] as if there were an Israel "according
   to the Spirit."  And in another place he says, "For they who are the
   children of the flesh are not the children of God;" nor are "they all
   Israel who are of Israel;" [2931] nor is "he a Jew who is one
   outwardly, nor is that circumcision' which is outward in the flesh:
   but he is a Jew who is one inwardly;' and circumcision is that of the
   heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter." [2932]   For if the
   judgment respecting the "Jew inwardly" be adopted, we must understand
   that, as there is a "bodily" race of Jews, so also is there a race of
   "Jews inwardly," the soul having acquired this nobility for certain
   mysterious reasons.  Moreover, there are many prophecies which predict
   regarding Israel and Judah what is about to befall them.  And do not
   such promises as are written concerning them, in respect of their being
   mean in expression, and manifesting no elevation (of thought), nor
   anything worthy of the promise of God, need a mystical interpretation?
   And if the "spiritual" promises are announced by visible signs, then
   they to whom the promises are made are not "corporeal."  And not to
   linger over the point of the Jew who is a Jew "inwardly," nor over that
   of the Israelite according to the "inner man"--these statements being
   sufficient for those who are not devoid of understanding--we return to
   our subject, and say that Jacob is the father of the twelve patriarchs,
   and they of the rulers of the people; and these, again, of the other
   Israelites.  Do not, then, the "corporeal" Israelites refer their
   descent to the rulers of the people, and the rulers of the people to
   the patriarchs, and the patriarchs to Jacob, and those still higher up;
   while are not the "spiritual" Israelites, of whom the "corporeal"
   Israelites were the type, sprung from the families, and the families
   from the tribes, and the tribes from some one individual whose descent
   is not of a "corporeal" but of a better kind,--he, too, being born of
   Isaac, and he of Abraham,--all going back to Adam, whom the apostle
   declares to be Christ?  For every beginning of those families which
   have relation to God as to the Father of all, took its commencement
   lower down with Christ, who is next to the God and Father of all,
   [2933] being thus the Father of every soul, as Adam is the father of
   all men.  And if Eve also is intended by the apostle to refer to the
   Church, it is not surprising that Cain, who was born of Eve, and all
   after him, whose descent goes back to Eve, should be types of the
   Church, inasmuch as in a pre-eminent sense they are all descended from
   the Church.

   22.  Now, if the statements made to us regarding Israel, and its tribes
   and its families, are calculated to impress us, when the Saviour says,
   "I was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," [2934]
   we do not understand the expression as the Ebionites do, who are poor
   in understanding (deriving their name from the poverty of their
   intellect--"Ebion" signifying "poor" in Hebrew), so as to suppose that
   the Saviour came specially to the "carnal" Israelites; for "they who
   are the children of the flesh are not the children of God." [2935]
   Again, the apostle teaches regarding Jerusalem as follows:  "The
   Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all."
   [2936]   And in another Epistle:  "But ye are come unto mount Zion, and
   to the city of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
   innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and to the
   Church of the first-born which are written in heaven." [2937]   If,
   then, Israel is among the race of souls, [2938] and if there is in
   heaven a city of Jerusalem, it follows that the cities of Israel have
   for their metropolis the heavenly Jerusalem, and it consequently is the
   metropolis of all Judea.  Whatever, therefore, is predicted of
   Jerusalem, and spoken of it, if we listen to the words of Paul as those
   of God, and of one who utters wisdom, we must understand the Scriptures
   as speaking of the heavenly city, and of the whole territory included
   within the cities of the holy land.  For perhaps it is to these cities
   that the Saviour refers us, when to those who have gained credit by
   having managed their "pounds" well, He assigns the presidency over five
   or ten cities.  If, therefore, the prophecies relating to Judea, and
   Jerusalem, and Israel, and Judah, and Jacob, not being understood by us
   in a "carnal" sense, indicate some such mysteries (as already
   mentioned), it will follow also that the predictions concerning Egypt
   and the Egyptians, Babylon and the Babylonians, Tyre and the Tyrians,
   Sidon and the Sidonians, or the other nations, are spoken not only of
   these "bodily" Egyptians, and Babylonians, and Tyrians, and Sidonians,
   but also of their "spiritual" (counterparts).  For if there be
   "spiritual" Israelites, it follows that there are also "spiritual"
   Egyptians and Babylonians.  For what is related in Ezekiel concerning
   Pharaoh king of Egypt does not at all apply to the case of a certain
   man who ruled or was said to rule over Egypt, as will be evident to
   those who give it careful consideration.  Similarly, what is said about
   the ruler of Tyre cannot be understood of a certain man who ruled over
   Tyre.  And what is said in many places, and especially in Isaiah, of
   Nebuchadnezzar, cannot be explained of that individual.  For the man
   Nebuchadnezzar neither fell from heaven, nor was he the morning star,
   nor did he arise upon the earth in the morning.  Nor would any man of
   understanding interpret what is said in Ezekiel about Egypt--viz., that
   in forty years it should be laid desolate, so that the footstep of man
   should not be found thereon, and that the ravages of war should be so
   great that the blood should run throughout the whole of it, and rise to
   the knees--of that Egypt which is situated beside the Ethiopians whose
   bodies are blackened by the sun.

   23.  And perhaps as those here, dying according to the death common to
   all, are, in consequence of the deeds done here, so arranged as to
   obtain different places according to the proportion of their sins, if
   they should be deemed worthy of the place called Hades; [2939] so those
   there dying, so to speak, descend into this Hades, being judged
   deserving of different abodes--better or worse--throughout all this
   space of earth, and (of being descended) from parents of different
   kinds, [2940] so that an Israelite may sometimes fall among Scythians,
   and an Egyptian descend into Judea.  And yet the Saviour came to gather
   together the lost sheep of the house of Israel; but many of the
   Israelites not having yielded to His teaching, those from the Gentiles
   were called....And these points, as we suppose, have been concealed in
   the histories.  For "the kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a
   field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof
   goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field." [2941]
   Let us notice, then, whether the apparent and superficial and obvious
   meaning of Scripture does not resemble a field filled with plants of
   every kind, while the things lying in it, and not visible to all, but
   buried, as it were, under the plants that are seen, are the hidden
   treasures of wisdom and knowledge; which the Spirit through Isaiah
   [2942] calls dark and invisible and concealed, God alone being able to
   break the brazen gates that conceal them, and to burst the iron bars
   that are upon the gates, in order that all the statements in the book
   of Genesis may be discovered which refer to the various genuine kinds,
   and seeds, as it were, of souls, which stand nearly related to Israel,
   or at a distance from it; and the descent into Egypt of the seventy
   souls, that they may there become as the "stars of heaven in
   multitude."  But since not all who are of them are the light of the
   world--"for not all who are of Israel are Israel" [2943] --they become
   from seventy souls as the "sand that is beside the sea-shore
   innumerable."
     

   [2812] te enargeia ton blepomenon.

   [2813] oude ton didaskalon pleonazonton.

   [2814] te dia 'Iesou theosebeia.

   [2815] meizon e kata anthropon to pragma einai.

   [2816] chresmous.

   [2817] Matt. x. 18.

   [2818] Cf. Matt. vii. 22, 23.

   [2819] soteria dogmata.

   [2820] proepheteuthe ho Christos.

   [2821] ek ton meron.

   [2822] epidemese.

   [2823] ouk eti basileis 'Ioudaian echrematisan.

   [2824] Cf. Hos. iii. 4.  Quoted from the Septuagint.

   [2825] Termed by Rufinus "Patriarch."

   [2826] Deut. xxxii.

   [2827] Deut. xxxii. 21.

   [2828] Cf. 1 Cor. i. 26-28.

   [2829] Ps. xlv. 1, 2.

   [2830] Cf. Ps. lxxii. 7.

   [2831] Ps. lxxii. 8.

   [2832] eteke kai en gastri esche, kai eteken huion.

   [2833] Cf. Isa. viii. 8, 9.

   [2834] Cf. Mic. v. 2 with Matt. ii. 6.

   [2835] Cf. Dan. ix. 25.

   [2836] Cf. Job xl. and xli.

   [2837] to mega ketos.

   [2838] Cf. Luke x. 19.

   [2839] hos en epitom*.

   [2840] dia touto tes apo ton ethnon ekloges kekratekota.

   [2841] ichnos enthousiasmou.

   [2842] to huper anthropon ton noematon.

   [2843] ho technikos logos.

   [2844] Sphodra tou pros ti kai heneka tinos heuriskomenou tois touton
   epimelomenois, peri tas hormas, kai tas phantasias, kai phuseis ton
   zoon, kai tas kataskeuas ton somaton.

   [2845] chreokopeitai.

   [2846] en eutelei kai eukataphroneto lexei.

   [2847] kathemaxeumenai.

   [2848] 1 Cor. ii. 4.

   [2849] tes stoicheioseos.

   [2850] entupothesetai.

   [2851] chronois aioniois.

   [2852] hos en epidrome.

   [2853] ta hagia anagnosmata.

   [2854] pos dei ephodeuein.

   [2855] hoi idiotai ton ek tes peritomes.

   [2856] aisthetos.

   [2857] Cf. Zech. ix. 10.

   [2858] Cf. Isa. vii. 15.

   [2859] Cf. Isa. xi. 6, 7.

   [2860] para to deon.

   [2861] Cf. Jer. xv. 14.

   [2862] Cf. Ex. xx. 5.

   [2863] Cf. 1 Sam. xv. 11.

   [2864] Cf. Isa. xlv. 7.

   [2865] Cf. Amos iii. 6.

   [2866] Cf. Mic. i. 12.

   [2867] Cf. 1 Sam. xvi. 14; xviii. 10.

   [2868] idiotikon.

   [2869] epipnoias.

   [2870] kanonos.

   [2871] tupous einai ta gegrammena.

   [2872] 1 Cor. ii. 12, 13, and 16 ad fin.

   [2873] Murion hoson kakei, hos di opes, megiston kai pleiston noematon
   ou bracheian aphormen parechonton.

   [2874] aporrheta.

   [2875] pantele musteria.

   [2876] Luke xi. 52.

   [2877] The Septuagint:  Kai su de apograpsai auta seauto trissos, eis
   bsulen kai gnosin epi to platos tes kardias sou ; didako oun se alethe
   logon, kai gnosin alethe hupakouein, tou apokrinesthai se logous
   aletheias tois proballomenois soi.  The Vulgate reads:  Ecce, descripsi
   eam tibi tripliciter, in cogitationibus et scientia, ut ostenderem tibi
   firmitatem et eloquia veritatis, respondere ex his illis, qui miserunt
   te.

   [2878] Cf. note 4, ut supra.

   [2879] 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7.

   [2880] paranomo numphio.

   [2881] ton kato noematon.

   [2882] pepoliomenois.

   [2883] Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 9 and Deut. xxv. 4.

   [2884] Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 9, 10.

   [2885] Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7, 8.

   [2886] 1 Cor. x. 11.

   [2887] 1 Cor. x. 4.

   [2888] Cf. Ex. xxv. 40 and Heb. viii. 5.

   [2889] allegoroumena.

   [2890] Col. ii. 16.

   [2891] Heb. viii. 5.

   [2892] hos theion andra.

   [2893] Rom. xi. 4; cf. 1 Kings xix. 18.  [3 Kings according to the
   Septuagint and Vulgate enumeration.  S.]

   [2894] tinas apo tou theiou genous, i.e., Israelites.

   [2895] peri ton aistheton demiourgematon.

   [2896] glaphuron.

   [2897] autothen.

   [2898] hupo tes lexeos helkomenoi to agogon akraton echouses.

   [2899] en te diegesei tes peri ton noeton akolouthias.

   [2900] kata to soma.

   [2901] Oude touton pante akraton ten historian ton prosuphasmenon kata
   to somatikon echonton, me gegenemenon ; oude ten nomothesian kai tas
   entolas pantos to eulogon emphainonta .  One ms. reads gegenemenen,
   referring to historian, on which one editor remarks, "Hic et in
   sequentibus imploro fidem codicum!"

   [2902] dia dokouses istorias kai ou somatikos gegenemenes.

   [2903] kata ten lexin.

   [2904] hoson epi to kath' heautous tereisthai.

   [2905] Gen. xvii. 14.

   [2906] Ex. xvi. 29.

   [2907] psuchras paradoseis.

   [2908] topon hekasto einai dischilious pecheis.

   [2909] Eis aperantologian eleluthasi.

   [2910] Luke x. 4.

   [2911] ei me ara peponthos ti para phusin tunchanoi.

   [2912] 1 Cor. vii. 18.

   [2913] eike.

   [2914] kai te kata to rheton chresimon nomothesia.

   [2915] gegonen.

   [2916] kata to aistheton.

   [2917] Cf. Gen. xlviii. 22 and Josh. xxiv. 32.

   [2918] Cf. Ex. xx. 12 and Eph. vi. 2, 3.

   [2919] choris pases anagoges.

   [2920] Cf. Ex. xx. 13-16.

   [2921] [Matt. v. 22.]

   [2922] Matt. v. 34.

   [2923] 1 Thess. v. 14.

   [2924] Ei kai para tois philotimoterois dunatai sozein hekaston auton,
   meta tou me atheteisthai ten kata to rheton hentolen, bathe Theou
   sophias.

   [2925] perielkusthesetai.

   [2926] John v. 39.

   [2927] hoproegoumenos.

   [2928] Olon ton noun philotimeteon katalambanein, suneironta ton peri
   ton kata ten lexin adunaton logon noetos tois ou monon ouk adunatois,
   alla kai alethesi kata ten historian, sunallegoroumenois tois hoson epi
   te lexei, me gegenemenois.

   [2929] en 'Iesou to tou Naue.

   [2930] 1 Cor. x. 18.

   [2931] Rom. ix. 6, 8.

   [2932] Rom. ii. 28, 29.

   [2933] Pasa gar arche patrion ton hos pros ton ton holon Theon,
   katotero apo tou Christou erxato tou meta ton ton holon Theon kai
   patera.

   [2934] Matt. xv. 24.

   [2935] Rom. ix. 8.  [See Dr. Burton's Inquiry into the Heresies of the
   Apostolic Age (Bampton Lectures), pp. 184, 185, 498, 499.  S.]

   [2936] Gal. iv. 26.

   [2937] Heb. xii. 22, 23.

   [2938] en psuchon genei.

   [2939] tou kaloumenou choriou hadou.

   [2940] kai para toisde, e toisde tois patrasi.

   [2941] Matt. xiii. 44.

   [2942] Cf. Isa. xlv. 3.

   [2943] Rom. ix. 6.
     

   From the Latin.

   24.  This descent of the holy fathers into Egypt will appear as granted
   to this world by the providence of God for the illumination of others,
   and for the instruction of the human race, that so by this means the
   souls of others might be assisted in the work of enlightenment.  For to
   them was first granted the privilege of converse with God, because
   theirs is the only race which is said to see God; this being the
   meaning, by interpretation, of the word "Israel." [2944]   And now it
   follows that, agreeably to this view, ought the statement to be
   accepted and explained that Egypt was scourged with ten plagues, to
   allow the people of God to depart, or the account of what was done with
   the people in the wilderness, or of the building of the tabernacle by
   means of contributions from all the people, or of the wearing of the
   priestly robes, or of the vessels of the public service, because, as it
   is written, they truly contain within them the "shadow and form of
   heavenly things."  For Paul openly says of them, that "they serve unto
   the example and shadow of heavenly things." [2945]   There are,
   moreover, contained in this same law the precepts and institutions,
   according to which men are to live in the holy land.  Threatenings also
   are held out as impending over those who shall transgress the law;
   different kinds of purifications are moreover prescribed for those who
   required purification, as being persons who were liable to frequent
   pollution, that by means of these they may arrive at last at that one
   purification after which no further pollution is permitted.  The very
   people are numbered, though not all; for the souls of children are not
   yet old enough to be numbered according to the divine command:  nor are
   those souls who cannot become the head of another, but are themselves
   subordinated to others as to a head, who are called "women," who
   certainly are not included in that numbering which is enjoined by God;
   but they alone are numbered who are called "men," by which it might be
   shown that the women could not be counted separately, [2946] but were
   included in those called men.  Those, however, especially belong to the
   sacred number, who are prepared to go forth to the battles of the
   Israelites, and are able to fight against those public and private
   enemies [2947] whom the Father subjects to the Son, who sits on His
   right hand that He may destroy all principality and power, and by means
   of these bands of His soldiery, who, being engaged in a warfare for
   God, do not entangle themselves in secular business, He may overturn
   the Kingdom of His adversary; by whom the shields of faith are borne,
   and the weapons of wisdom brandished; among whom also the helmet of
   hope and salvation gleams forth, and the breastplate of brightness
   fortifies the breast that is filled with God.  Such soldiers appear to
   me to be indicated, and to be prepared for wars of this kind, in those
   persons who in the sacred books are ordered by God's command to be
   numbered.  But of these, by far the more perfect and distinguished are
   shown to be those of whom the very hairs of the head are said to be
   numbered.  Such, indeed, as were punished for their sins, whose bodies
   fell in the wilderness, appear to possess a resemblance to those who
   had made indeed no little progress, but who could not at all, for
   various reasons, attain to the end of perfection; because they are
   reported either to have murmured, or to have worshipped idols, or to
   have committed fornication, or to have done some evil work which the
   mind ought not even to conceive.  I do not consider the following even
   to be without some mystical meaning, [2948] viz., that certain (of the
   Israelites), possessing many flocks and animals, take possession by
   anticipation of a country adapted for pasture and the feeding of
   cattle, which was the very first that the right hand of the Hebrews had
   secured in war. [2949]   For, making a request of Moses to receive this
   region, they are divided off by the waters of the Jordan, and set apart
   from any possession in the holy land.  And this Jordan, according to
   the form of heavenly things, may appear to water and irrigate thirsty
   souls, and the senses that are adjacent to it. [2950]   In connection
   with which, even this statement does not appear superfluous, that Moses
   indeed hears from God what is described in the book of Leviticus, while
   in Deuteronomy it is the people that are the auditors of Moses, and who
   learn from him what they could not hear from God.  For as Deuteronomy
   is called, as it were, the second law, which to some will appear to
   convey this signification, that when the first law which was given
   through Moses had come to an end, so a second legislation seems to have
   been enacted, which was specially transmitted by Moses to his successor
   Joshua, who is certainly believed to embody a type [2951] of our
   Saviour, by whose second law--that is, the precepts of the Gospel--all
   things are brought to perfection.

   25.  We have to see, however, whether this deeper meaning may not
   perhaps be indicated, viz., that as in Deuteronomy the legislation is
   made known with greater clearness and distinctness than in those books
   which were first written, so also by that advent of the Saviour which
   He accomplished in His state of humiliation, when He assumed the form
   of a servant, that more celebrated and renowned second advent in the
   glory of His Father may not be pointed out, and in it the types of
   Deuteronomy may be fulfilled, when in the kingdom of heaven all the
   saints shall live according to the laws of the everlasting Gospel; and
   as in His coming now He fulfilled that law which has a shadow of good
   things to come, so also by that (future) glorious advent will be
   fulfilled and brought to perfection the shadows of the present advent.
   For thus spake the prophet regarding it:  "The breath of our
   countenance, Christ the Lord, to whom we said, that under Thy shadow we
   shall live among the nations;" [2952] at the time, viz., when He will
   more worthily transfer all the saints from a temporal to an everlasting
   Gospel, according to the designation, employed by John in the
   Apocalypse, of "an everlasting Gospel." [2953]

   26.  But let it be sufficient for us in all these matters to adapt our
   understanding to the rule of religion, and so to think of the words of
   the Holy Spirit as not to deem the language the ornate composition of
   feeble human eloquence, but to hold, according to the scriptural
   statement, that "all the glory of the King is within," [2954] and that
   the treasure of divine meaning is enclosed within the frail vessel of
   the common letter.  And if any curious reader were still to ask an
   explanation of individual points, let him come and hear, along with
   ourselves, how the Apostle Paul, seeking to penetrate by help of the
   Holy Spirit, who searches even the "deep things" of God, into the
   depths of divine wisdom and knowledge, and yet, unable to reach the
   end, so to speak, and to come to a thorough knowledge, exclaims in
   despair and amazement, "Oh the depth of the riches of the knowledge and
   wisdom of God!" [2955]   Now, that it was from despair of attaining a
   perfect understanding that he uttered this exclamation, listen to his
   own words:  "How unsearchable are God's judgments! and His ways, how
   past finding out!" [2956]   For he did not say that God's judgments
   were difficult to discover, but that they were altogether inscrutable;
   nor that it was (simply) difficult to trace out His ways, but that they
   were altogether past finding out.  For however far a man may advance in
   his investigations, and how great soever the progress that he may make
   by unremitting study, assisted even by the grace of God, and with his
   mind enlightened, he will not be able to attain to the end of those
   things which are the object of his inquiries.  Nor can any created mind
   deem it possible in any way to attain a full comprehension (of things);
   but after having discovered certain of the objects of its research, it
   sees again others which have still to be sought out.  And even if it
   should succeed in mastering these, it will see again many others
   succeeding them which must form the subject of investigation.  And on
   this account, therefore, Solomon, the wisest of men, beholding by his
   wisdom the nature of things, says, "I said, I will become wise; and
   wisdom herself was made far from me, far further than it was; and a
   profound depth, who shall find?" [2957]   Isaiah also, knowing that the
   beginnings of things could not be discovered by a mortal nature, and
   not even by those natures which, although more divine than human, were
   nevertheless themselves created or formed; knowing then, that by none
   of these could either the beginning or the end be discovered, says,
   "Tell the former things which have been, and we know that ye are gods;
   or announce what are the last things, and then we shall see that ye are
   gods." [2958]   For my Hebrew teacher also used thus to teach, that as
   the beginning or end of all things could be comprehended by no one,
   save only our Lord Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit, so under the form
   of a vision Isaiah spake of two seraphim alone, who with two wings
   cover the countenance of God, and with two His feet, and with two do
   fly, calling to each other alternately, and saying, "Holy, holy, holy
   is the Lord God of Sabaoth; the whole earth is full of Thy glory."
   [2959]   That the seraphim alone have both their wings over the face of
   God, and over His feet, we venture to declare as meaning that neither
   the hosts of holy angels, nor the "holy seats," nor the "dominions,"
   nor the "principalities," nor the "powers," can fully understand the
   beginning of all things, and the limits of the universe.  But we are to
   understand that those "saints" whom the Spirit has enrolled, and the
   "virtues," approach very closely to those very beginnings, and attain
   to a height which the others cannot reach; and yet whatever it be that
   these "virtues" have learned through revelation from the Son of God and
   from the Holy Spirit--and they will certainly be able to learn very
   much, and those of higher rank much more than those of a
   lower--nevertheless it is impossible for them to comprehend all things,
   according to the statement, "The most part of the works of God are
   hid." [2960]   And therefore also it is to be desired that every one,
   according to his strength, should ever stretch out to those things that
   are before, "forgetting the things that are behind," both to better
   works and to a clearer apprehension and understanding, through Jesus
   Christ our Saviour, to whom be glory for ever!

   27.  Let every one, then, who cares for truth, be little concerned
   about words and language, seeing that in every nation there prevails a
   different usage of speech; but let him rather direct his attention to
   the meaning conveyed by the words, than to the nature of the words that
   convey the meaning, especially in matters of such importance and
   difficulty:  as, e.g., when it is an object of investigation whether
   there is any "substance" in which neither colour, nor form, nor touch,
   nor magnitude is to be understood as existing visible to the mind
   alone, which any one names as he pleases; for the Greeks call such
   asomaton, i.e., "incorporeal," while holy Scripture declares it to be
   "invisible," for Paul calls Christ the "image of the invisible God,"
   and says again, that by Christ were created all things "visible and
   invisible."  And by this it is declared that there are, among created
   things, certain "substances" that are, according to their peculiar
   nature, invisible.  But although these are not themselves "corporeal,"
   they nevertheless make use of bodies, while they are themselves better
   than any bodily substances.  But that "substance" of the Trinity which
   is the beginning and cause of all things, "from which are all things,
   and through which are all things, and in which are all things," cannot
   be believed to be either a body or in a body, but is altogether
   incorporeal.  And now let it suffice to have spoken briefly on these
   points (although in a digression, caused by the nature of the subject),
   in order to show that there are certain things, the meaning of which
   cannot be unfolded at all by any words of human language, but which are
   made known more through simple apprehension than by any properties of
   words.  And under this rule must be brought also the understanding of
   the sacred Scripture, in order that its statements may be judged not
   according to the worthlessness of the letter, but according to the
   divinity of the Holy Spirit, by whose inspiration they were caused to
   be written.

   Summary (of Doctrine) Regarding the Father, the Son, and the Holy
   Spirit, and the Other Topics Discussed in the Preceding Pages.

   28.  It is now time, after the rapid consideration which to the best of
   our ability we have given to the topics discussed, to recapitulate, by
   way of summing up what we have said in different places, the individual
   points, and first of all to restate our conclusions regarding the
   Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

   Seeing God the Father is invisible and inseparable from the Son, the
   Son is not generated from Him by "prolation," as some suppose.  For if
   the Son be a "prolation" of the Father (the term "prolation" being used
   to signify such a generation as that of animals or men usually is),
   then, of necessity, both He who "prolated" and He who was "prolated"
   are corporeal.  For we do not say, as the heretics suppose, that some
   part of the substance of God was converted into the Son, or that the
   Son was procreated by the Father out of things non-existent, [2961]
   i.e., beyond His own substance, so that there once was a time when He
   did not exist; but, putting away all corporeal conceptions, we say that
   the Word and Wisdom was begotten out of the invisible and incorporeal
   without any corporeal feeling, as if it were an act of the will
   proceeding from the understanding.  Nor, seeing He is called the Son of
   (His) love, will it appear absurd if in this way He be called the Son
   of (His) will.  Nay, John also indicates that "God is Light," [2962]
   and Paul also declares that the Son is the splendour of everlasting
   light. [2963]   As light, accordingly, could never exist without
   splendour, so neither can the Son be understood to exist without the
   Father; for He is called the "express image of His person," [2964] and
   the Word and Wisdom.  How, then, can it be asserted that there once was
   a time when He was not the Son?  For that is nothing else than to say
   that there was once a time when He was not the Truth, nor the Wisdom,
   nor the Life, although in all these He is judged to be the perfect
   essence of God the Father; for these things cannot be severed from Him,
   or even be separated from His essence.  And although these qualities
   are said to be many in understanding, [2965] yet in their nature and
   essence they are one, and in them is the fulness of divinity.  Now this
   expression which we employ--"that there never was a time when He did
   not exist"--is to be understood with an allowance.  For these very
   words "when" or "never" have a meaning that relates to time, whereas
   the statements made regarding Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are to be
   understood as transcending all time, all ages, and all eternity.  For
   it is the Trinity alone which exceeds the comprehension not only of
   temporal but even of eternal intelligence; while other things which are
   not included in it [2966] are to be measured by times and ages.  This
   Son of God, then, in respect of the Word being God, which was in the
   beginning with God, no one will logically suppose to be contained in
   any place; nor yet in respect of His being "Wisdom," or "Truth," or the
   "Life," or "Righteousness," or "Sanctification," or "Redemption:"  for
   all these properties do not require space to be able to act or to
   operate, but each one of them is to be understood as meaning those
   individuals who participate in His virtue and working.

   29.  Now, if any one were to say that, through those who are partakers
   of the "Word" of God, or of His "Wisdom," or His "Truth," or His
   "Life," the Word and Wisdom itself appeared to be contained in a place,
   we should have to say to him in answer, that there is no doubt that
   Christ, in respect of being the "Word" or "Wisdom," or all other
   things, was in Paul, and that he therefore said, "Do you seek a proof
   of Christ speaking in me?" [2967] and again, "I live, yet not I, but
   Christ liveth in me." [2968]   Seeing, then, He was in Paul, who will
   doubt that He was in a similar manner in Peter and in John, and in each
   one of the saints; and not only in those who are upon the earth, but in
   those also who are in heaven?  For it is absurd to say that Christ was
   in Peter and in Paul, but not in Michael the archangel, nor in
   Gabriel.  And from this it is distinctly shown that the divinity of the
   Son of God was not shut up in some place; otherwise it would have been
   in it only, and not in another.  But since, in conformity with the
   majesty of its incorporeal nature, it is confined to no place; so,
   again, it cannot be understood to be wanting in any.  But this is
   understood to be the sole difference, that although He is in different
   individuals as we have said--as Peter, or Paul, or Michael, or
   Gabriel--He is not in a similar way in all beings whatever.  For He is
   more fully and clearly, and, so to speak, more openly in archangels
   than in other holy men. [2969]   And this is evident from the
   statement, that when all who are saints have arrived at the summit of
   perfection, they are said to be made like, or equal to, the angels,
   agreeably to the declaration in the Gospels. [2970]   Whence it is
   clear that Christ is in each individual in as great a degree as the
   amount of his deserts allows. [2971]

   30.  Having, then, briefly restated these points regarding the nature
   of the Trinity, it follows that we notice shortly this statement also,
   that "by the Son" are said to be created "all things that are in
   heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
   thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers:  all things were
   created by Him, and for Him; and He is before all, and all things
   consist by Him, who is the Head." [2972]   In conformity with which
   John also in his Gospel says:  "All things were created by Him; and
   without Him was not anything made." [2973]   And David, intimating that
   the mystery of the entire Trinity was (concerned) in the creation of
   all things, says:  "By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made; and
   all the host of them by the Spirit of His mouth." [2974]

   After these points we shall appropriately remind (the reader) of the
   bodily advent and incarnation of the only-begotten Son of God, with
   respect to whom we are not to suppose that all the majesty of His
   divinity is confined within the limits of His slender body, so that all
   the "word" of God, and His "wisdom," and "essential truth," and "life,"
   was either rent asunder from the Father, or restrained and confined
   within the narrowness of His bodily person, and is not to be considered
   to have operated anywhere besides; but the cautious acknowledgment of a
   religious man ought to be between the two, so that it ought neither to
   be believed that anything of divinity was wanting in Christ, nor that
   any separation at all was made from the essence of the Father, which is
   everywhere.  For some such meaning seems to be indicated by John the
   Baptist, when he said to the multitude in the bodily absence of Jesus,
   "There standeth one among you whom ye know not:  He it is who cometh
   after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose."
   [2975]   For it certainly could not be said of Him, who was absent, so
   far as His bodily presence is concerned, that He was standing in the
   midst of those among whom the Son of God was not bodily present.

   31.  Let no one, however, suppose that by this we affirm that some
   portion of the divinity of the Son of God was in Christ, and that the
   remaining portion was elsewhere or everywhere, which may be the opinion
   of those who are ignorant of the nature of an incorporeal and invisible
   essence.  For it is impossible to speak of the parts of an incorporeal
   being, or to make any division of them; but He is in all things, and
   through all things, and above all things, in the manner in which we
   have spoken above, i.e., in the manner in which He is understood to be
   either "wisdom," or the "word," or the "life," or the "truth," by which
   method of understanding all confinement of a local kind is undoubtedly
   excluded.  The Son of God, then, desiring for the salvation of the
   human race to appear unto men, and to sojourn among them, assumed not
   only a human body, as some suppose, but also a soul resembling our
   souls indeed in nature, but in will and power [2976] resembling
   Himself, and such as might unfailingly accomplish all the desires and
   arrangements of the "word" and "wisdom."  Now, that He had a soul,
   [2977] is most clearly shown by the Saviour in the Gospels, when He
   said, "No man taketh my life from me, but I lay it down of myself.  I
   have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again."
   [2978]   And again, "My soul is sorrowful even unto death." [2979]
   And again, "Now is my soul troubled." [2980]   For the "Word" of God is
   not to be understood to be a "sorrowful and troubled" soul, because
   with the authority of divinity He says, "I have power to lay down my
   life."  Nor yet do we assert that the Son of God was in that soul as he
   was in the soul of Paul or Peter and the other saints, in whom Christ
   is believed to speak as He does in Paul.  But regarding all these we
   are to hold, as Scripture declares, "No one is clean from filthiness,
   not even if his life lasted but a single day." [2981]   But this soul
   which was in Jesus, before it knew the evil, selected the good; and
   because He loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, therefore God
   "anointed Him with the oil of gladness above His fellows." [2982]   He
   is anointed, then, with the oil of gladness when He is united to the
   "word" of God in a stainless union, and by this means alone of all
   souls was incapable of sin, because it was capable of (receiving) well
   and fully the Son of God; and therefore also it is one with Him, and is
   named by His titles, and is called Jesus Christ, by whom all things are
   said to be made.  Of which soul, seeing it had received into itself the
   whole wisdom of God, and the truth, and the life, I think that the
   apostle also said this:  "Our life is hidden with Christ in God; but
   when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear
   with him in glory." [2983]   For what other Christ can be here
   understood, who is said to be hidden in God, and who is afterwards to
   appear, except Him who is related to have been anointed with the oil of
   gladness, i.e., to have been filled with God essentially, [2984] in
   whom he is now said to be hidden?  For on this account is Christ
   proposed as an example to all believers, because as He always, even
   before he knew evil at all, selected the good, and loved righteousness,
   and hated iniquity, and therefore God anointed Him with the oil of
   gladness; so also ought each one, after a lapse or sin, to cleanse
   himself from his stains, making Him his example, and, taking Him as the
   guide of his journey, enter upon the steep way of virtue, that so
   perchance by this means, as far as possible we may, by imitating Him,
   be made partakers of the divine nature, according to the words of
   Scripture:  "He that saith that he believeth in Christ, ought so to
   walk, as He also walked." [2985]

   This "word," then, and this "wisdom," by the imitation of which we are
   said to be either wise or rational (beings), becomes "all things to all
   men, that it may gain all;" and because it is made weak, it is
   therefore said of it, "Though He was crucified through weakness, yet He
   liveth by the power of God." [2986]   Finally, to the Corinthians who
   were weak, Paul declares that he "knew nothing, save Jesus Christ, and
   Him crucified." [2987]

   32.  Some, indeed, would have the following language of the apostle
   applied to the soul itself, as soon as it had assumed flesh from Mary,
   [2988] viz., "Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to
   be equal with God, but divested Himself (of His glory) [2989] taking
   upon Himself the form of a servant;" [2990] since He undoubtedly
   restored it to the form of God by means of better examples and
   training, and recalled it to that fulness of which He had divested
   Himself.

   As now by participation in the Son of God one is adopted as a son,
   [2991] and by participating in that wisdom which is in God is rendered
   wise, so also by participation in the Holy Spirit is a man rendered
   holy and spiritual.  For it is one and the same thing to have a share
   in the Holy Spirit, which is (the Spirit) of the Father and the Son,
   since the nature of the Trinity is one and incorporeal.  And what we
   have said regarding the participation of the soul is to be understood
   of angels and heavenly powers in a similar way as of souls, because
   every rational creature needs a participation in the Trinity.

   Respecting also the plan of this visible world--seeing one of the most
   important questions usually raised is as to the manner of its
   existence--we have spoken to the best of our ability in the preceding
   pages, for the sake of those who are accustomed to seek the grounds of
   their belief in our religion, and also for those who stir against us
   heretical questions, and who are accustomed to bandy about [2992] the
   word "matter," which they have not yet been able to understand; of
   which subject I now deem it necessary briefly to remind (the reader).

   33.  And, in the first place, it is to be noted that we have nowhere
   found in the canonical Scriptures, [2993] up to the present time, the
   word "matter" used for that substance which is said to underlie
   bodies.  For in the expression of Isaiah, "And he shall devour hule,"
   i.e., matter, "like hay," [2994] when speaking of those who were
   appointed to undergo their punishments, the word "matter" was used
   instead of "sins."  And if this word "matter" should happen to occur in
   any other passage, it will never be found, in my opinion, to have the
   signification of which we are now in quest, unless perhaps in the book
   which is called the Wisdom of Solomon, a work which is certainly not
   esteemed authoritative by all. [2995]   In that book, however, we find
   written as follows:  "For thy almighty hand, that made the world out of
   shapeless matter, wanted not means to send among them a multitude of
   bears and fierce lions." [2996]   Very many, indeed, are of opinion
   that the matter of which things are made is itself signified in the
   language used by Moses in the beginning of Genesis:  "In the beginning
   God made heaven and earth; and the earth was invisible, and not
   arranged:" [2997]   for by the words "invisible and not arranged" Moses
   would seem to mean nothing else than shapeless matter.  But if this be
   truly matter, it is clear then that the original elements of bodies
   [2998] are not incapable of change.  For those who posited
   "atoms"--either those particles which are incapable of subdivision, or
   those which are subdivided into equal parts--or any one element, as the
   principles of bodily things, could not posit the word "matter" in the
   proper sense of the term among the first principles of things.  For if
   they will have it that matter underlies every body--a substance
   convertible or changeable, or divisible in all its parts--they will
   not, as is proper, assert that it exists without qualities.  And with
   them we agree, for we altogether deny that matter ought to be spoken of
   as "unbegotten" or "uncreated," agreeably to our former statements,
   when we pointed out that from water, and earth, and air or heat,
   different kinds of fruits were produced by different kinds of trees; or
   when we showed that fire, and air, and water, and earth were
   alternately converted into each other, and that one element was
   resolved into another by a kind of mutual consanguinity; and also when
   we proved that from the food either of men or animals the substance of
   the flesh was derived, or that the moisture of the natural seed was
   converted into solid flesh and bones;--all which go to prove that the
   substance of the body is changeable, and may pass from one quality into
   all others.

   34.  Nevertheless we must not forget that a substance never exists
   without a quality, and that it is by an act of the understanding alone
   that this (substance) which underlies bodies, and which is capable of
   quality, is discovered to be matter.  Some indeed, in their desire to
   investigate these subjects more profoundly, have ventured to assert
   that bodily nature [2999] is nothing else than qualities.  For if
   hardness and softness, heat and cold, moisture and aridity, be
   qualities; and if, when these or other (qualities) of this sort be cut
   away, nothing else is understood to remain, then all things will appear
   to be "qualities."  And therefore also those persons who make these
   assertions have endeavoured to maintain, that since all who say that
   matter was uncreated will admit that qualities were created by God, it
   may be in this way shown that even according to them matter was not
   uncreated; since qualities constitute everything, and these are
   declared by all without contradiction to have been made by God.  Those,
   again, who would make out that qualities are superimposed from without
   upon a certain underlying matter, make use of illustrations of this
   kind:  e.g., Paul undoubtedly is either silent, or speaks, or watches,
   or sleeps, or maintains a certain attitude of body; for he is either in
   a sitting, or standing, or recumbent position.  For these are
   "accidents" belonging to men, without which they are almost never
   found.  And yet our conception of man does not lay down any of these
   things as a definition of him; but we so understand and regard him by
   their means, that we do not at all take into account the reason of his
   (particular) condition either in watching, or in sleeping, or in
   speaking, or in keeping silence, or in any other action that must
   necessarily happen to men. [3000]   If any one, then, can regard Paul
   as being without all these things which are capable of happening, he
   will in the same way also be able to understand this underlying
   (substance) without qualities.  When, then, our mind puts away all
   qualities from its conception, and gazes, so to speak, upon the
   underlying element alone, and keeps its attention closely upon it,
   without any reference to the softness or hardness, or heat or cold, or
   humidity or aridity of the substance, then by means of this somewhat
   simulated process of thought [3001] it will appear to behold matter
   clear from qualities of every kind.

   35.  But some one will perhaps inquire whether we can obtain out of
   Scripture any grounds for such an understanding of the subject.  Now I
   think some such view is indicated in the Psalms, when the prophet says,
   "Mine eyes have seen thine imperfection;" [3002] by which the mind of
   the prophet, examining with keener glance the first principles of
   things, and separating in thought and imagination only between matter
   and its qualities, perceived the imperfection of God, which certainly
   is understood to be perfected by the addition of qualities.  Enoch
   also, in his book, speaks as follows:  "I have walked on even to
   imperfection;" [3003] which expression I consider may be understood in
   a similar manner, viz., that the mind of the prophet proceeded in its
   scrutiny and investigation of all visible things, until it arrived at
   that first beginning in which it beheld imperfect matter (existing)
   without "qualities."  For it is written in the same book of Enoch, "I
   beheld the whole of matter;" [3004] which is so understood as if he had
   said:  "I have clearly seen all the divisions of matter which are
   broken up from one into each individual species either of men, or
   animals, or of the sky, or of the sun, or of all other things in this
   world."  After these points, now, we proved to the best of our power in
   the preceding pages that all things which exist were made by God, and
   that there was nothing which was not made, save the nature of the
   Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and that God, who is by
   nature good, desiring to have those upon whom He might confer benefits,
   and who might rejoice in receiving His benefits, created creatures
   worthy (of this), i.e., who were capable of receiving Him in a worthy
   manner, who, He says, are also begotten by Him as his sons.  He made
   all things, moreover, by number and measure.  For there is nothing
   before God without either limit or measure.  For by His power He
   comprehends all things, and He Himself is comprehended by the strength
   of no created thing, because that nature is known to itself alone.  For
   the Father alone knoweth the Son, and the Son alone knoweth the Father,
   and the Holy Spirit alone searcheth even the deep things of God.  All
   created things, therefore, i.e., either the number of rational beings
   or the measure of bodily matter, are distinguished by Him as being
   within a certain number or measurement; since, as it was necessary for
   an intellectual nature to employ bodies, and this nature is shown to be
   changeable and convertible by the very condition of its being created
   (for what did not exist, but began to exist, is said by this very
   circumstance to be of mutable nature), it can have neither goodness nor
   wickedness as an essential, but only as an accidental attribute of its
   being.  Seeing, then, as we have said, that rational nature was mutable
   and changeable, so that it made use of a different bodily covering of
   this or that sort of quality, according to its merits, it was
   necessary, as God foreknew there would be diversities in souls or
   spiritual powers, that He should create also a bodily nature the
   qualities of which might be changed at the will of the Creator into all
   that was required.  And this bodily nature must last as long as those
   things which require it as a covering:  for there will be always
   rational natures which need a bodily covering; and there will therefore
   always be a bodily nature whose coverings must necessarily be used by
   rational creatures, unless some one be able to demonstrate by arguments
   that a rational nature can live without a body.  But how
   difficult--nay, how almost impossible--this is for our understanding,
   we have shown in the preceding pages, in our discussion of the
   individual topics.

   36.  It will not, I consider, be opposed to the nature of our
   undertaking, if we restate with all possible brevity our opinions on
   the immortality of rational natures.  Every one who participates in
   anything, is unquestionably of one essence and nature with him who is
   partaker of the same thing.  For example, as all eyes participate in
   the light, so accordingly all eyes which partake of the light are of
   one nature; but although every eye partakes of the light, yet, inasmuch
   as one sees more clearly, and another more obscurely, every eye does
   not equally share in the light.  And again, all hearing receives voice
   or sound, and therefore all hearing is of one nature; but each one
   hears more rapidly or more slowly, according as the quality of his
   hearing is clear and sound.  Let us pass now from these sensuous
   illustrations to the consideration of intellectual things.  Every mind
   which partakes of intellectual light ought undoubtedly to be of one
   nature with every mind which partakes in a similar manner of
   intellectual light.  If the heavenly virtues, then, partake of
   intellectual light, i.e., of divine nature, because they participate in
   wisdom and holiness, and if human souls, have partaken of the same
   light and wisdom, and thus are mutually of one nature and of one
   essence,--then, since the heavenly virtues are incorruptible and
   immortal, the essence of the human soul will also be immortal and
   incorruptible.  And not only so, but because the nature of Father, and
   Son, and Holy Spirit, whose intellectual light alone all created things
   have a share, is incorruptible and eternal, it is altogether consistent
   and necessary that every substance which partakes of that eternal
   nature should last for ever, and be incorruptible and eternal, so that
   the eternity of divine goodness may be understood also in this respect,
   that they who obtain its benefits are also eternal.  But as, in the
   instances referred to, a diversity in the participation of the light
   was observed, when the glance of the beholder was described as being
   duller or more acute, so also a diversity is to be noted in the
   participation of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, varying with the degree
   of zeal or capacity of mind.  If such were not the case, [3005] we have
   to consider whether it would not seem to be an act of impiety to say
   that the mind which is capable of (receiving) God should admit of a
   destruction of its essence; [3006] as if the very fact that it is able
   to feel and understand God could not suffice for its perpetual
   existence, especially since, if even through neglect the mind fall away
   from a pure and complete reception of God, it nevertheless contains
   within it certain seeds of restoration and renewal to a better
   understanding, seeing the "inner," which is also called the "rational"
   man, is renewed after "the image and likeness of God, who created
   him."  And therefore the prophet says, "All the ends of the earth shall
   remember, and turn unto the Lord; and all the kindreds of the nations
   shall worship before Thee." [3007]

   37.  If any one, indeed, venture to ascribe essential corruption to Him
   who was made after the image and likeness of God, then, in my opinion,
   this impious charge extends even to the Son of God Himself, for He is
   called in Scripture the image of God. [3008]   Or he who holds this
   opinion would certainly impugn the authority of Scripture, which says
   that man was made in the image of God; and in him are manifestly to be
   discovered traces of the divine image, not by any appearance of the
   bodily frame, which is corruptible, but by mental wisdom, by justice,
   moderation, virtue, wisdom, discipline; in fine, by the whole band of
   virtues, which are innate in the essence of God, and which may enter
   into man by diligence and imitation of God; as the Lord also intimates
   in the Gospel, when He says, "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father
   also is merciful;" [3009] and, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father also
   is perfect." [3010]   From which it is clearly shown that all these
   virtues are perpetually in God, and that they can never approach to or
   depart from Him, whereas by men they are acquired only slowly, and one
   by one.  And hence also by these means they seem to have a kind of
   relationship with God; and since God knows all things, and none of
   things intellectual in themselves can elude His notice [3011] (for God
   the Father alone, and His only-begotten Son, and the Holy Spirit, not
   only possess a knowledge of those things which they have created, but
   also of themselves), a rational understanding also, advancing from
   small things to great, and from things visible to things invisible, may
   attain to a more perfect knowledge.  For it is placed in the body, and
   advances from sensible things themselves, which are corporeal, to
   things that are intellectual.  But lest our statement that things
   intellectual are not cognisable by the senses should appear unbecoming,
   we shall employ the instance of Solomon, who says, "You will find also
   a divine sense;" [3012] by which he shows that those things which are
   intellectual are to be sought out not by means of a bodily sense, but
   by a certain other which he calls "divine."  And with this sense must
   we look on each of those rational beings which we have enumerated
   above; and with this sense are to be understood those words which we
   speak, and those statements to be weighed which we commit to writing.
   For the divine nature knows even those thoughts which we revolve within
   us in silence.  And on those matters of which we have spoken, or on the
   others which follow from them, according to the rule above laid down,
   are our opinions to be formed.
     

   [2944] Cf. Gen. xxxii. 28-30.

   [2945] Heb. viii. 5.

   [2946] Extrinsecus.

   [2947] Hostes inimicosque.

   [2948] Ne illud quidem sacramento aliquo vacuum puto.

   [2949] Quem primum omnium Israelitici belli dextra defenderat.

   [2950] Rigare et inundare animas sitientes, et sensus adjacentes sibi.

   [2951] Formam.

   [2952] Lam. iv. 20.

   [2953] Cf. Rev. xiv. 6.

   [2954] Omnis gloria regis intrinsecus est.  Heb., Sept., and Vulgate
   all read, "daughter of the king."  Probably the omission of "filiæ" in
   the text may be due to an error of the copyists.  [Cf. Ps. xlv. 13.]

   [2955] Rom. xi. 33.

   [2956] Rom. xi. 33.

   [2957] [Eccles. vii. 23, 24.]  The Septuagint reads:  Eipa,
   Sophisthesomai ; kai haute emakrunthe ap' emou, makran huper ho en, kai
   bathu bathos, tis heuresei auto; the Vulgate translates this literally.

   [2958] Cf. Isa. xli. 22, 23.

   [2959] Isa. vi. 3.

   [2960] Cf. Ecclus. xvi. 21.

   [2961] Ex nullis substantibus.

   [2962] 1 John i. 5.

   [2963] Cf. Heb. i. 3.

   [2964] Cf. Heb. i. 3.

   [2965] Quæ quidem quamvis intellectu multa esse dicantur.

   [2966] Quæ sunt extra Trinitatem.

   [2967] Cf. 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

   [2968] Gal. ii. 20.

   [2969] Quam in aliis sanctis viris.  "Aliis" is found in the mss., but
   is wanting in many editions.

   [2970] Cf. Matt. xxii. 30 and Luke xx. 36.

   [2971] Unde constat in singulis quibusque tantum effici Christum,
   quantum ratio indulserit meritorum.

   [2972] Cf. Col. i. 16-18.

   [2973] John i. 3.

   [2974] Ps. xxxiii. 6.

   [2975] Cf. John i. 26, 27.

   [2976] Proposito vero et virtute similem sibi.

   [2977] Animam.

   [2978] John x. 18.

   [2979] Matt. xxvi. 38.

   [2980] John xii. 27.

   [2981] Cf. Job xv. 14.

   [2982] Ps. xlv. 7.

   [2983] Cf. Col. iii. 3, 4.

   [2984] Substantialiter.

   [2985] Cf. 1 John ii. 6.

   [2986] 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

   [2987] 1 Cor. ii. 2.

   [2988] De Maria corpus assumsit.

   [2989] Semet ipsum exinanivit.

   [2990] Phil. ii. 6, 7.

   [2991] In filium adoptatur.

   [2992] Ventilare.

   [2993] In Scripturis canonicis.

   [2994] Isa. x. 17, kai phagetai osei chorton ten hulen, Sept.  The
   Vulgate follows the Masoretic text.

   [2995] [Elucidation VI].

   [2996] Wisd. xi. 17.

   [2997] Gen. i. 2, "invisibilis et incomposita;" "inanis et vacua,"
   Vulg.

   [2998] Initia corporum.

   [2999] Naturam corpoream.

   [3000] Nec tamen sensus noster manifeste de eo aliquid horum definit,
   sed ita eum per hæc intelligimus, vel consideramus, ut non omnino
   rationem status ejus comprehendamus, vel in eo, quod vigilat, vel in
   eo, quod dormit, aut in quo loquitur, vel tacet, et si qua alia sunt,
   quæ accidere necesse est hominibus.

   [3001] Tunc simulatâ quodammodo cogitatione.

   [3002] Ps. cxxxix. 16, to akatergaston mou eidosan hoi ophthalmoi sou,
   Sept.; "Imperfectum meum viderunt oculi tui," Vulg. (same as in the
   text.) kkyny" v'r ymlg--"Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being
   imperfect," Auth. Vers.  Cf. Gesenius and Fürst, s.v., sln.

   [3003] Ambulavi usque ad imperfectum; cf. Book of Enoch, chap. xvii.

   [3004] Universas materias perspexi; cf. Book of Enoch, chap. xvii.  [On
   this apocryphal book, see the learned remarks of Dr. Pusey in his reply
   to Canon Farrar, What is of Faith as to Everlasting Punishment; pp.
   52-59.  London, 1881.]

   [3005] Alioquin.

   [3006] Substantialem interitum.

   [3007] Ps. xxii. 27.

   [3008] Cf. Col. i. 15 and 2 Cor. iv. 4.

   [3009] Luke vi. 36.

   [3010] Matt. v. 48.

   [3011] Nihil eum rerum intellectualium ex se lateat.

   [3012] Cf. Prov. ii. 5, epignosin Theou heureseis (Sept.), Scientiam
   Dei invenies (Vulg.).  'tsmt syhl' tr.
     
     

   Elucidations.

   ------------------------

   I.

   (Teaching of the Church, p. 240.)

   It is noteworthy how frequently our author employs this expression in
   this immediate connection.  Concerning the punishment of the wicked he
   asserts a "clearly defined teaching."  He shows what the Church's
   teaching "has laid down" touching demons and angels.  Touching the
   origin of the world, he again asserts the Church's teaching, and then
   concedes, that, over and above what he maintains, there is "no clear
   statement regarding it,"--i.e., the creation and its antecedents.
   Elsewhere he speaks of "the faith of the Church," and all this as
   something accepted by all Christians recognised as orthodox or
   Catholics.

   Not to recur to the subject of the creeds [3013] known at this period
   in the East and West, this frequent recognition of a system of
   theology, or something like it, starts some interesting inquiries.  We
   have space to state only some of them:--

   1.  Was Origen here speaking of the catechetical school of Alexandria,
   and assuming its teaching to be that of the whole Church?

   2.  If so, was not this recognition of the Alexandrian leadership the
   precursor of that terrible shock which was given to Christendom by the
   rise of Arianism out of such a stronghold of orthodoxy?

   3.  Does not the power of Athanasius to stand "against the world"
   assure us that he was strong in the position that "the teaching of the
   Church," in Alexandria and elsewhere, was against Arias, whom he was
   able to defeat by prescription as well as by Scripture?

   4.  Is it not clear that all this was asserted, held, and defined
   without help from the West, and that the West merely responded Amen to
   what Alexandria had taught from the beginning?

   5.  Is not the evidence overwhelming, that nothing but passive
   testimony was thus far heard of in connection with the see of Rome?

   6.  If the "teaching of the Church," then, was so far independent of
   that see that Christendom neither waited for its voice, nor recognised
   it as of any exceptional importance in the definition of the faith and
   the elimination of heresy, is it not evident that the entire fabric of
   the Middle-Age polity in the West has its origin in times and manners
   widely differing from the Apostolic Age and that of the Ante-Nicene
   Fathers?

   II.

   (Subjection, p. 343.)

   The subordination of the Son, as held by all Nicene Christians, is
   defended by Bull [3014] at great length and with profound learning.  It
   is my purpose elsewhere to quote his splendid tribute to the
   substantial orthodoxy of Origen.  Professor Shedd, in his work on
   Christian Doctrine, [3015] pronounces the Nicene Creed "the received
   creed-statement among all Trinitarian Churches."  I assume that this
   note will be of interest to all theological minds.  For an
   unsatisfactory and meagre account of primitive creeds, see Bunsen,
   Hippol., iii. pp. 125-132.

   III.

   (Proceedeth from the Father, p. 344.)

   The double procession is no part of the Creed of Christendom; nor did
   it become fixed in the West, till, by the influence of Charlemagne, the
   important but not immaculate Council of Frankfort (a.d. 794) completed
   the work of Toledo, and committed the whole West to its support.  The
   Anglican Church recites the Filioque liturgically, but explains its
   adhesion to this formula in a manner satisfactory to the Easterns.  It
   has no rightful place in the Creed, however; and its retention in the
   Nicene Symbol is a just offence, not only to the Greeks, but against
   the great canon, Quod semper, etc.

   Compare Pearson on the Creed, [3016] and these candid words:  "Although
   the addition of words to the formal Creed be not justifiable," etc.
   Consult the valuable work of Theophanes Procopowicz, Bishop of
   Novgorod, which contains a history of the literature of the subject
   down to his times. [3017]   It is a matter debated anew in our own age,
   in view of advances to the Greeks made by Dr. Döllinger and the Old
   Catholics.  Let me refer to a volume almost equally learned and
   ill-digested, [3018] written by a clever author who was perverted to
   Romanism, and returned, after many years, to the Church of England.  It
   bears the marks of many unreal impressions received during his
   "Babylonish captivity."  I refer to a work of E. S. Foulkes.

   IV.

   (The faith of the Church, p. 347.)

   Before the Nicene Council local creeds were in use, all agreeing
   substantially; all scriptural, but some more full than others.  Of
   these the ancient Symbol of Jerusalem was chief, and this forms the
   base of the Nicene Creed.  It is here noteworthy that Origen speaks of
   "the faith" as something settled and known:  clearly, he did not
   intentionally transgress it.  Bull says, [3019] "Græci Scriptores
   Ante-Nicæni ton kanona tes pisteos passim in scriptis suis
   commemorant."  See the Jerusalem Creed, on the same page; and note, the
   Church of Jerusalem is called by the Second OEcumenical Council (a.d.
   381), "the mother of all the Churches."  So ignorant were the Fathers
   of that date of any other "mother Church," that they address this very
   statement to the clergy of Rome. [3020]   Compare Eusebius, book iv.
   cap. viii.

   V.

   (Endowed with freedom of will, p. 347.)

   Elsewhere in this treatise our author defines the will as "able to
   resist external causes."  The profound work of Edwards needs no words
   of mine. [3021]   As an example of logic the most acute, it is the
   glory of early American literature.  I read it eagerly during my
   college course, while under the guidance of my instructor in
   philosophy, the amiable and profound Dr. Tappan (afterwards president
   of the University of Michigan), who taught us to admire it, but not to
   regard it as infallible.  See his vigorous review of Edwards, [3022] in
   which he argues as a disciple of Coleridge and of Plato.

   On allied subjects, let me refer to Wiggers's Augustinismus, etc.,
   translated by Professor Emerson of Andover; [3023] also to Bledsoe's
   Theodicy, [3024] heretofore cited.  I venture to say, that, among the
   thinkers of America, and as Christian philosophers, both Bledsoe and
   Tappan are less known and honoured than they deserve to be.

   VI.

   (Not esteemed authoritative by all, p. 379.)

   Not by Jerome, nor Rufinus, nor Chrysostom.  Gregory the Great, Bishop
   of Rome, is also shown by Lardner (Credib., v. 127) to have quoted "the
   wisdom of Solomon" only as the sayings of a wise man; not at all as
   Scripture.  The Easterns are equally represented by John Damascene
   (a.d. 730), who says of this book that it is one of those "excellent
   and useful" books which are not reckoned with the hagiographa.  But
   Methodius is an exception; for he quotes this book twice (says Lardner)
   as if it were Scripture, and certainly cites it not infrequently.  Yet
   his testimony does not amount, perhaps, to more than an acceptance of
   the same as only deutero-canonical; i.e., as one of the books read in
   the Church for instruction, but not appealed to as establishing any
   doctrine otherwise unknown to the Church.  We may examine this subject
   when we come to Methodius, in vol. vi. of this series.

   ------------------------

   Note.

   This is a convenient place for the following tables, compiled from
   Eusebius as far as his history goes; i.e. a.d. 305.  See also Dr.
   Robinson's Researches.

   I.  The See of Jerusalem.

   1.  James, the Lord's brother.

   2.  Simeon.

   3.  Justus.

   4.  Zacchæus.

   5.  Tobias.

   6.  Benjamin.

   7.  John.

   8.  Matthew.

   9.  Philip.

   10.  Seneca.

   11.  Justus.

   12.  Levi.

   13.  Ephres.

   14.  Joseph.

   15.  Judah.

   16.  Marcus.

   17.  Cassian.

   18.  Publius.

   19.  Maximus.

   20.  Julian.

   21.  Caius.

   22.  Symmachus.

   23.  Caius II.

   24.  Julian II.

   25.  Capito.

   26.  Maximus II.

   27.  Antoninus.

   28.  Valens.

   29.  Dolichianus.

   30.  Narcissus.

   31.  Dius.

   32.  Germanio.

   33.  Gordius.

   34.  Narcissus II.

   35.  Alexander.

   36.  Mazabanes.

   37.  Hymenæus.

   38.  Zabdas.

   39.  Hermon, a.d. 300.

   II.  The See of Alexandria.

   1.  Annianus.

   2.  Avilius.

   3.  Cerdon.

   4.  Primus.

   5.  Justus.

   6.  Eumenes.

   7.  Marcus.

   8.  Celadion.

   9.  Aggripinus.

   10.  Julianus.

   11.  Demetrius.

   12.  Heraclas.

   13.  Dionysius.

   14.  Maximus.

   15.  Theonas.

   16.  Peter.

   17.  Achillas.

   18.  Alexander, [3025] a.d. 326.
     

   [3013] On which consult Dupin, and, for another view, Bunsen's
   Hippolytus.  See also p. 383, infra.

   [3014] Vol. v. p. 134, and passim to 745; also vi. 368.

   [3015] Vol. ii. p. 438.

   [3016] pp. 521-526.

   [3017] Tractatus de Processione Spiritus Sancti, Gothæ, a.d. 1772.

   [3018] Christendom's Divisions, London, 1865.

   [3019] Vol. vi. p. 132, 133.

   [3020] Theodoret, book v. cap. ix.

   [3021] Ed. Converse, New York, 1829.

   [3022] A Review of Edward's Inquiry, by Henry Philip Tappan, New York,
   1839.

   [3023] New York, 1840.

   [3024] New York, 1854.  See vol. ii. p. 522, this series.

   [3025] Alexander, dying just after the Nicene Council, was succeeded by
   the great Athanasius.