Book I.

   ------------------------

   Contents.

   The following are the contents of the first book of The Refutation of
   all Heresies. [20]

   We propose to furnish an account of the tenets of natural philosophers,
   and who these are, as well as the tenets of moral philosophers, and who
   these are; and thirdly, the tenets of logicians, and who these
   logicians are.

   Among natural philosophers [21] may be enumerated Thales, Pythagoras,
   Empedocles, Heraclitus, Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Archelaus,
   Parmenides, Leucippus, Democritus, Xenophanes, Ecphantus, Hippo.

   Among moral philosophers are Socrates, pupil of Archelaus the
   physicist, (and) Plato the pupil of Socrates. This (speculator)
   combined three systems of philosophy.

   Among logicians is Aristotle, pupil of Plato. He systematized the art
   of dialectics. Among the Stoic (logicians) were Chrysippus (and) Zeno.
   Epicurus, however, advanced an opinion almost contrary to all
   philosophers. Pyrrho was an Academic; [22] this (speculator) taught the
   incomprehensibility of everything. The Brahmins among the Indians, and
   the Druids among the Celts, and Hesiod (devoted themselves to
   philosophic pursuits).
     

   [20] The four of the mss. of the first book extant prior to the recent
   discovery of seven out of the remaining nine books of The Refutation,
   concur in ascribing it to Origen. These inscriptions run thus:  1.
   "Refutation by Origen of all Heresies;" 2. "Of Origen's
   Philosophumena...these are the contents;" 3. "Being estimable
   (Dissertations) by Origen, a man of the greatest wisdom." The recently
   discovered ms. itself in the margin has the words, "Origen, and
   Origen's opinion." The title, as agreed upon by modern commentators,
   is: 1. "Book I. of Origen's Refutation of all Heresies" (Wolf and
   Gronovius); 2. "A Refutation of all Heresies;" 3. "Origen's
   Philosophumena, or the Refutation of all Heresies." The last is
   Miller's in his Oxford edition, 1851. The title might have been,
   "Philosophumena, and the Refutation (therefrom) of all Heresies." There
   were obviously two divisions of the work: (1) A résumé of the tenets of
   the philosophers (books i., ii., iii., iv.), preparatory to (2) the
   refutation of heresies, on the ground of their derivative character
   from Greek and Egyptian speculation. Bunsen would denominate the work
   "St. Hippolytus' (Bishop and Martyr) Refutation of all Heresies; what
   remains of the ten books."

   [21] Most of what follows in book i. is a compilation from ancient
   sources.  The ablest résumé followed by Cicero in the De Nat. Deor., of
   the tenets of the ancient philosophers, is to be found in Aristotle's
   Metaphysics. The English reader is referred to the Metaphysics, book i.
   pp. 13-46 (Bohn's Classical Library), also to the translator's analysis
   prefixed to this work, pp. 17-25. See also Diogenes' Lives of the
   Philosophers, and Tenneman's Manual of Philosophy (translated in Bohn's
   Library); Plutarch, De Placitis Philosophorum; Lewes' Biographical
   History of (Ancient) Philosophy; and Rev. Dr. F. D. Maurice's History
   of (Ancient) Metaphysical and Moral Philosophy. The same subject is
   discussed in Ritter's History of Philosophy (translated by Morrison).

   [22] This word is variously given thus: Academian, Academeian,
   Academaic, Academe, Cademian, and Cadimian. The two last would seem to
   indicate the character rather than the philosophy of Pyrrho. To favour
   this view, the text should be altered into kai ademos, i.e., apodemos =
   from home, not domestic.
     

   The Prooemium.--Motives for Undertaking the Refutation; Exposure of the
   Ancient Mysteries; Plan of the Work; Completeness of the Refutation;
   Value of the Treatise to Future Ages.

   We must not overlook [23] any figment devised by those denominated
   philosophers among the Greeks. For even their incoherent tenets must be
   received as worthy of credit, on account of the excessive madness of
   the heretics; who, from the observance of silence, and from concealing
   their own ineffable mysteries, have by many been supposed worshippers
   of God. [24] We have likewise, on a former occasion, [25] expounded the
   doctrines of these briefly, not illustrating them with any degree of
   minuteness, but refuting them in coarse digest; not having considered
   it requisite to bring to light their secret [26] doctrines, in order
   that, when we have explained their tenets by enigmas, they, becoming
   ashamed, lest also, by our divulging their mysteries, we should convict
   them of atheism, might be induced to desist in some degree from their
   unreasonable opinion and their profane attempt. [27]   But since I
   perceive that they have not been abashed by our forbearance, and have
   made no account of how God is long-suffering, though blasphemed by
   them, in order that either from shame they may repent, or should they
   persevere, be justly condemned, I am forced to proceed in my intention
   of exposing those secret mysteries of theirs, which, to the initiated,
   with a vast amount of plausibility they deliver who are not accustomed
   first to disclose (to any one), till, by keeping such in suspense
   during a period (of necessary preparation), and by rendering him
   blasphemous towards the true God they have acquired complete ascendancy
   over him, and perceive him eagerly panting after the promised
   disclosure. And then, when they have tested him to be enslaved by sin,
   they initiate him, putting him in possession of the perfection of
   wicked things. Previously, however, they bind him with an oath neither
   to divulge (the mysteries), nor to hold communication with any person
   whatsoever, unless he first undergo similar subjection, though, when
   the doctrine has been simply delivered (to any one), there was no
   longer any need of an oath. For he who was content to submit to the
   necessary purgation, [28] and so receive the perfect mysteries of these
   men, by the very act itself, as well as in reference to his own
   conscience, will feel himself sufficiently under an obligation not to
   divulge to others; for if he once disclose wickedness of this
   description to any man, he would neither be reckoned among men, nor be
   deemed worthy to behold the light, since not even irrational animals
   [29] would attempt such an enormity, as we shall explain when we come
   to treat of such topics.

   Since, however, reason compels us to plunge [30] into the very depth of
   narrative, we conceive we should not be silent, but, expounding the
   tenets of the several schools with minuteness, we shall evince reserve
   in nothing. Now it seems expedient, even at the expense of a more
   protracted investigation, not to shrink from labour; for we shall leave
   behind us no trifling auxiliary to human life against the recurrence of
   error, when all are made to behold, in an obvious light, the
   clandestine rites of these men, and the secret orgies which, retaining
   under their management, they deliver to the initiated only. But none
   will refute these, save the Holy Spirit bequeathed unto the Church,
   which the Apostles, having in the first instance received, have
   transmitted to those who have rightly believed. But we, as being their
   successors, and as participators in this grace, high-priesthood, and
   office of teaching, [31] as well as being reputed guardians of the
   Church, must not be found deficient in vigilance, [32] or disposed to
   suppress correct doctrine. [33] Not even, however, labouring with every
   energy of body and soul, do we tire in our attempt adequately to render
   our Divine Benefactor a fitting return; and yet withal we do not so
   requite Him in a becoming manner, except we are not remiss in
   discharging the trust committed to us, but careful to complete the
   measure of our particular opportunity, and to impart to all without
   grudging whatever the Holy Ghost supplies, not only bringing to light,
   [34] by means of our refutation, matters foreign (to our subject), but
   also whatsoever things the truth has received by the grace of the
   Father, [35] and ministered to men. These also, illustrating by
   argument and creating testimony [36] by letters, we shall unabashed
   proclaim.

   In order, then, as we have already stated, that we may prove them
   atheists, both in opinion and their mode (of treating a question) and
   in fact, and (in order to show) whence it is that their attempted
   theories have accrued unto them, and that they have endeavoured to
   establish their tenets, taking nothing from the holy Scriptures--nor is
   it from preserving the succession of any saint that they have hurried
   headlong into these opinions;--but that their doctrines have derived
   their origin [37] from the wisdom of the Greeks, from the conclusions
   of those who have formed systems of philosophy, and from would-be
   mysteries, and the vagaries of astrologers,--it seems, then, advisable,
   in the first instance, by explaining the opinions advanced by the
   philosophers of the Greeks, to satisfy our readers that such are of
   greater antiquity than these (heresies), and more deserving of
   reverence in reference to their views respecting the divinity; in the
   next place, to compare each heresy with the system of each speculator,
   so as to show that the earliest champion of the heresy availing himself
   [38] of these attempted theories, has turned them to advantage by
   appropriating their principles, and, impelled from these into worse,
   has constructed his own doctrine. The undertaking admittedly is full of
   labour, and (is one) requiring extended research. We shall not,
   however, be wanting in exertion; for afterwards it will be a source of
   joy, just like an athlete obtaining with much toil the crown, or a
   merchant after a huge swell of sea compassing gain, or a husbandman
   after sweat of brow enjoying the fruits, or a prophet after reproaches
   and insults seeing his predictions turning out true. In the
   commencement, therefore, we shall declare who first, among the Greeks,
   pointed out (the principles of) natural philosophy. For from these
   especially have they furtively taken their views who have first
   propounded these heresies, [39] as we shall subsequently prove when we
   come to compare them one with another.  Assigning to each of those who
   take the lead among philosophers their own peculiar tenets, we shall
   publicly exhibit these heresiarchs as naked and unseemly.
     

   [23] Some hiatus at the beginning of this sentence is apparent.

   [24] An elaborate defence of this position forms the subject of
   Cudworth's great work, The True Intellectual System of the Universe.

   [25] This statement has been urged against Origen's authorship, in
   favour of Epiphanius, who wrote an extended treatise on the Heresies,
   with an abridgment.

   [26] That is, their esoteric mysteries, intended only for a favoured
   few, as contrasted with the exoteric, designed for more general
   diffusion.

   [27] One ms. has--"the profane opinion and unreasonable attempt."

   [28] "To learn" (Roeper).

   [29] "And those that are irrational animals do not attempt," (or)
   "because irrational," etc. The last is Sancroft's reading; that in the
   text, Roeper's.

   [30] "Ascend up to" (Roeper).

   [31] This passage is quoted by those who impugn the authorship of
   Origen on the ground of his never having been a bishop of the Church.
   It is not, however, quite certain that the words refer to the episcopal
   office exclusively.

   [32] The common reading is in the future, but the present tense is
   adopted by Richter in his Critical Observations, p. 77.

   [33] It might be, "any opinion that may be subservient to the subject
   taken in hand." This is Cruice's rendering in his Latin version. A
   different reading is, "we must not be silent as regards reasons that
   hold good," or, "as regards rational distinctions," or, "refrain from
   utterances through the instrument of reasoning." The last is Roeper's.

   [34] Another reading is, "bringing into a collection."

   [35] Or, "the Spirit."

   [36] Or, "indicating a witness;" or, "having adduced testimony."

   [37] Or, "a starting-point."

   [38] Or, "devoting his attention to;" or, "having lighted upon."

   [39] The chief writers on the early heresies are: Irenæus, of the
   second century; Hippolytus, his pupil, of the third; Philastrius,
   Epiphanius, and St. Augustine, of the fourth century. The learned need
   scarcely be reminded of the comprehensive digest furnished by Ittigius
   in the preface to his dissertation on the heresies of the apostolic and
   post-apostolic ages. A book more within the reach of the general reader
   is Dr. Burton's Inquiry into the Heresies of the Apostolic Age.
     

   Chapter I.--Thales; His Physics and Theology; Founder of Greek
   Astronomy.

   It is said that Thales of Miletus, one of the seven [40] wise men,
   first attempted to frame a system of natural philosophy. This person
   said that some such thing as water is the generative principle of the
   universe, and its end;--for that out of this, solidified and again
   dissolved, all things consist, and that all things are supported on it;
   from which also arise both earthquakes and changes of the winds and
   atmospheric movements, [41] and that all things are both produced [42]
   and are in a state of flux corresponding with the nature of the primary
   author of generation;--and that the Deity [43] is that which has
   neither beginning nor end. This person, having been occupied with an
   hypothesis and investigation concerning the stars, became the earliest
   author to the Greeks of this kind of learning. And he, looking towards
   heaven, alleging that he was carefully examining supernal objects, fell
   into a well; and a certain maid, by name Thratta, remarked of him
   derisively, that while intent on beholding things in heaven, he did not
   know [44] what was at his feet. And he lived about the time of Croesus.
     

   [40] [These were: Periander of Corinth, b.c. 585; Pittacus of Mitylene,
   b.c. 570; Thales of Miletus, b.c. 548: Solon of Athens, b.c. 540; Chilo
   of Sparta, b.c. 597; Bias of Priene; Cleobulus of Lindus, b.c. 564.]

   [41] Or, "motions of the stars" (Roeper).

   [42] Or, "carried along" (Roeper).

   [43] Or," that which is divine." See Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., v.
   pp. 461, 463 (Heinsius and Sylburgius' ed.). Thales, on being asked,
   "What is God?" "That," replied he, "which has neither beginning nor
   end."

   [44] Or, "see."
     

   Chapter II.--Pythagoras; His Cosmogony; Rules of His Sect; Discoverer
   of Physiognomy; His Philosophy of Numbers; His System of the
   Transmigration of Souls; Zaratas on Demons; Why Pythagoras Forbade the
   Eating of Beans; The Mode of Living Adopted by His Disciples.

   But there was also, not far from these times, another philosophy which
   Pythagoras originated (who some say was a native of Samos), which they
   have denominated Italian, because that Pythagoras, flying from
   Polycrates the king of Samos, took up his residence in a city of Italy,
   and there passed the entire of his remaining years. And they who
   received in succession his doctrine, did not much differ from the same
   opinion. And this person, instituting an investigation concerning
   natural phenomena, [45] combined together astronomy, and geometry, and
   music. [46] And so he proclaimed that the Deity is a monad; and
   carefully acquainting himself with the nature of number, he affirmed
   that the world sings, and that its system corresponds with harmony, and
   he first resolved the motion of the seven stars into rhythm and melody.
   And being astonished at the management of the entire fabric, he
   required that at first his disciples should keep silence, as if persons
   coming into the world initiated in (the secrets of) the universe; next,
   when it seemed that they were sufficiently conversant with his mode of
   teaching his doctrine, and could forcibly philosophize concerning the
   stars and nature, then, considering them pure, he enjoins them to
   speak.  This man distributed his pupils in two orders, and called the
   one esoteric, but the other exoteric. And to the former he confided
   more advanced doctrines, and to the latter a more moderate amount of
   instruction.

   And he also touched on magic--as they say--and himself [47] discovered
   an art of physiogony, [48] laying down as a basis certain numbers and
   measures, saying that they comprised the principle of arithmetical
   philosophy by composition after this manner. The first number became an
   originating principle, which is one, indefinable, incomprehensible,
   having in itself all numbers that, according to plurality, can go on ad
   infinitum. But the primary monad became a principle of numbers,
   according to substance, [49] --which is a male monad, begetting after
   the manner of a parent all the rest of the numbers. Secondly, the duad
   is a female number, and the same also is by arithmeticians termed even.
   Thirdly, the triad is a male number. This also has been classified by
   arithmeticians under the denomination uneven. And in addition to all
   these is the tetrad, a female number; and the same also is called even,
   because it is female.  Therefore all the numbers that have been derived
   from the genus are four; but number is the indefinite genus, from which
   was constituted, according to them, the perfect [50] number, viz., the
   decade. For one, two, three, four, become ten, if its proper
   denomination be preserved essentially for each of the numbers.
   Pythagoras affirmed this to be a sacred quaternion, source of
   everlasting nature, [51] having, as it were, roots in itself; and that
   from this number all the numbers receive their originating principle.
   For eleven, and twelve, and the rest, partake of the origin of
   existence [52] from ten. Of this decade, the perfect number, there are
   termed four divisions,--namely, number, monad, [53] square, (and) cube.
   And the connections and blendings of these are performed, according to
   nature, for the generation of growth completing the productive number.
   For when the square itself is multiplied [54] into itself, a
   biquadratic is the result. But when the square is multiplied into the
   cube, the result is the product of a square and cube; and when the cube
   is multiplied into the cube, the product of two cubes is the result. So
   that all the numbers from which the production of existing (numbers)
   arises, are seven,--namely, number, monad, square, cube, biquadratic,
   quadratic-cube, cubo-cube.

   This philosopher likewise said that the soul is immortal, and that it
   subsists in successive bodies. Wherefore he asserted that before the
   Trojan era he was Æthalides, [55] and during the Trojan epoch
   Euphorbus, and subsequent to this Hermotimus of Samos, and after him
   Pyrrhus of Delos; fifth, Pythagoras. And Diodorus the Eretrian, [56]
   and Aristoxenus [57] the musician, assert that Pythagoras came to
   Zaratas [58] the Chaldean, and that he explained to him that there are
   two original causes of things, father and mother, and that father is
   light, but mother darkness; and that of the light the parts are hot,
   dry, not heavy, light, swift; but of darkness, cold, moist, weighty,
   slow; and that out of all these, from female and male, the world
   consists. But the world, he says, is a musical harmony; [59] wherefore,
   also, that the sun performs a circuit in accordance with harmony. And
   as regards the things that are produced from earth and the cosmical
   system, they maintain that Zaratas [60] makes the following statements:
   that there are two demons, the one celestial and the other terrestrial;
   and that the terrestrial sends up a production from earth, and that
   this is water; and that the celestial is a fire, partaking of the
   nature of air, hot and cold. [61] And he therefore affirms that none of
   these destroys or sullies the soul, for these constitute the substance
   of all things. And he is reported to have ordered his followers not to
   eat beans, because that Zaratas said that, at the origin and concretion
   of all things, when the earth was still undergoing its process of
   solidification, [62] and that of putrefaction had set in, the bean was
   produced. [63] And of this he mentions the following indication, that
   if any one, after having chewed a bean without the husk, places it
   opposite the sun for a certain period,--for this immediately will aid
   in the result,--it yields the smell of human seed. And he mentions also
   another clearer instance to be this: if, when the bean is blossoming,
   we take the bean and its flower, and deposit them in a jar, smear this
   over, and bury it in the ground, and after a few days uncover it, we
   shall see it wearing the appearance, first of a woman's pudendum, and
   after this, when closely examined, of the head of a child growing in
   along with it. This person, being burned along with his disciples in
   Croton, a town of Italy, perished. And this was a habit with him,
   whenever one repaired to him with a view of becoming his follower, (the
   candidate disciple was compelled) to sell his possessions, and lodge
   the money sealed with Pythagoras, and he continued in silence to
   undergo instruction, sometimes for three, but sometimes for five years.
   And again, on being released, he was permitted to associate with the
   rest, and remained as a disciple, and took his meals along with them;
   if otherwise, however, he received back his property, and was rejected.
   These persons, then, were styled Esoteric Pythagoreans, whereas the
   rest, Pythagoristæ.

   Among his followers, however, who escaped the conflagration were Lysis
   and Archippus, and the servant of Pythagoras, Zamolxis, [64] who also
   is said to have taught the Celtic Druids to cultivate the philosophy of
   Pythagoras. And they assert that Pythagoras learned from the Egyptians
   his system of numbers and measures; and being struck by the plausible,
   fanciful, and not easily revealed wisdom of the priests, he himself
   likewise, in imitation of them, enjoined silence, and made his
   disciples lead a solitary life in underground chapels. [65]
     

   [45] Or, "nature."

   [46] "And arithmetic" (added by Roeper).

   [47] Or, "and he first."

   [48] Or, "physiognomy."

   [49] Or, "in conformity with his hypothesis."

   [50] Or, "the third."

   [51] Or, "an everlasting nature;" or, "having the roots of an
   everlasting nature in itself," the words "as it were" being omitted in
   some mss.

   [52] Or, "production."

   [53] It should be probably, "monad, number." The monad was with
   Pythagoras, and in imitation of him with Leibnitz, the highest
   generalization of number, and a conception in abstraction, commensurate
   with what we call essence, whether of matter or spirit.

   [54] Kobisthe in text must be rendered "multiplied." The formulary is
   self-evident: (a^2)^2 = a^4, (a^2)^3 = a^6, (a^3)^3 = a^9.

   [55] Or Thallis. Æthalides, a son of Hermes, was herald of the
   Argonauts, and said never to have forgotten anything. In this way his
   soul remembered its successive migrations into the bodies of Euphorbus,
   Hermotimus, Pyrrhus, and Pythagoras. (See Diogenes' Lives, book viii.
   chap. i. sec. 4.)

   [56] No name occurs more frequently in the annals of Greek literature
   than that of Diodorus. One, however, with the title "of Eretria," as
   far as the translator knows, is mentioned only by Hippolytus; so that
   this is likely another Diodorus to be added to the long list already
   existing. It may be that Diodorus Eretriensis is the same as Diodorus
   Crotoniates, a Pythagorean philosopher. See Fabricius' Biblioth. Græc.,
   lib ii. cap. iii., lib. iii. cap. xxxi.; also Meursius' Annotations, p.
   20, on Chalcidius' Commentary on Plato's Timæus.  The article in
   Smith's Dictionary is a transcript of these.

   [57] Aristoxenus is mentioned by Cicero in his Tusculan Questions, book
   i. chap. xviii., as having broached a theory in psychology, which may
   have suggested, in modern times, to David Hartley his hypothesis of
   sensation being the result of nerval vibrations. Cicero says of
   Aristoxenus, "that he was so charmed with his own harmonies, that he
   sought to transfer them into investigations concerning our corporeal
   and spiritual nature."

   [58] Zaratas is another form of the name Zoroaster.

   [59] Or, "is a nature according to musical harmony" (preceding note);
   or, "The cosmical system is nature and a musical harmony."

   [60] Zaratas, or Zoroaster, is employed as a sort of generic
   denomination for philosopher by the Orientals, who, whatever portions
   of Asia they inhabit, mostly ascribe their speculative systems to a
   Zoroaster.  No less than six individuals bearing this name are spoken
   of.  Arnobius (Contr. Gentes., i. 52) mentions four--(1) a Chaldean,
   (2) Bactrian, (3) Pamphylian, (4) Armenian. Pliny mentions a fifth as a
   native of Proconnesus ( Nat. Hist.., xxx. 1), while Apuleius (Florida,
   ii. 15) a sixth Zoroaster, a native of Babylon, and contemporary with
   Pythagoras, the one evidently alluded to by Hippolytus. (See
   translator's Treatise on Metaphysics, chap. ii.)

   [61] Or, "that it was hot and cold," or "hot of moist."

   [62] Or it might be rendered, "a process of arrangement." The Abbe
   Cruice (in his edition of Hippolytus, Paris, 1860) suggests a different
   reading, which would make the words translate thus, "when the earth was
   an undigested and solid mass."

   [63] [See book vi. cap. xxii., infra, and note. But Clement gives
   another explanation. See vol. ii. p. 385, this series.]

   [64] Or, "Zametus."

   [65] Or, "leading them down into cells, made them," etc.; or, "made his
   disciples observe silence," etc.
     

   Chapter III.--Empedocles; His Twofold Cause; Tenet of Transmigration.

   But Empedocles, born after these, advanced likewise many statements
   respecting the nature of demons, to the effect that, being very
   numerous, they pass their time in managing earthly concerns.  This
   person affirmed the originating principle of the universe to be discord
   and friendship, and that the intelligible fire of the monad is the
   Deity, and that all things consist of fire, and will be resolved into
   fire; with which opinion the Stoics likewise almost agree, expecting a
   conflagration. But most of all does he concur with the tenet of
   transition of souls from body to body, expressing himself thus:--

   "For surely both youth and maid I was,

   And shrub, and bird, [66] and fish, from ocean stray'd." [67]

   This (philosopher) maintained the transmutation of all souls into any
   description of animal. For Pythagoras, the instructor of these (sages),
   [68] asserted that himself had been Euphorbus, who served in the
   expedition against Ilium, alleging that he recognised his shield. The
   foregoing are the tenets of Empedocles.
     

   [66] Or, "and beast," more in keeping with the sense of the name; or "a
   lamb" has been suggested in the Gottingen edition of Hippolytus.

   [67] Or, "traveller into the sea;" or, "mute ones from the sea;" or,
   "from the sea a glittering fish."

   [68] Or, "being the instructor of this (philosopher)."
     

   Chapter IV.--Heraclitus; His Universal Dogmatism; His Theory of Flux;
   Other Systems.

   But Heraclitus, a natural philosopher of Ephesus, surrendered himself
   to universal grief, condemning the ignorance of the entire of life, and
   of all men; nay, commiserating the (very) existence of mortals, for he
   asserted that he himself knew everything, whereas the rest of mankind
   nothing. [69]   But he also advanced statements almost in concert with
   Empedocles, saying that the originating principle of all things is
   discord and friendship, and that the Deity is a fire endued with
   intelligence, and that all things are borne one upon another, and never
   are at a standstill; and just as Empedocles, he affirmed that the
   entire locality about us is full of evil things, and that these evil
   things reach as far as the moon, being extended from the quarter
   situated around the earth, and that they do not advance further,
   inasmuch as the entire space above the moon is more pure. So also it
   seemed to Heraclitus.

   After these arose also other natural philosophers, whose opinions we
   have not deemed it necessary to declare, (inasmuch as) they present no
   diversity to those already specified. Since, however, upon the whole, a
   not inconsiderable school has sprung (from thence), and many natural
   philosophers subsequently have arisen from them, each advancing
   different accounts of the nature of the universe, it seems also to us
   advisable, that, explaining the philosophy that has come down by
   succession from Pythagoras, we should recur to the opinions entertained
   by those living after the time of Thales, and that, furnishing a
   narrative of these, we should approach the consideration of the ethical
   and logical philosophy which Socrates and Aristotle originated, the
   former ethical, and the latter logical. [70]
     

   [69] Proclus, in his commentary on Plato's Timæus, uses almost the same
   words: "but Heraclitus, in asserting his own universal knowledge, makes
   out all the rest of mankind ignorant."

   [70] Or, "and among these, Socrates a moral philosopher, and Aristotle
   a logician, originated systems."
     

   Chapter V.--Anaximander; His Theory of the Infinite; His Astronomic
   Opinions; His Physics.

   Anaximander, then, was the hearer of Thales.  Anaximander was son of
   Praxiadas, and a native of Miletus. This man said that the originating
   principle of existing things is a certain constitution of the Infinite,
   out of which the heavens are generated, and the worlds therein; and
   that this principle is eternal and undecaying, and comprising all the
   worlds. And he speaks of time as something of limited generation, and
   subsistence, and destruction. This person declared the Infinite to be
   an originating principle and element of existing things, being the
   first to employ such a denomination of the originating principle. But,
   moreover, he asserted that there is an eternal motion, by the agency of
   which it happens that the heavens [71] are generated; but that the
   earth is poised aloft, upheld by nothing, continuing (so) on account of
   its equal distance from all (the heavenly bodies); and that the figure
   of it is curved, circular, [72] similar to a column of stone. [73] And
   one of the surfaces we tread upon, but the other is opposite. [74]
   And that the stars are a circle of fire, separated from the fire which
   is in the vicinity of the world, and encompassed by air. And that
   certain atmospheric exhalations arise in places where the stars shine;
   wherefore, also, when these exhalations are obstructed, that eclipses
   take place. And that the moon sometimes appears full and sometimes
   waning, according to the obstruction or opening of its (orbital) paths.
   But that the circle of the sun is twenty-seven times [75] larger than
   the moon, and that the sun is situated in the highest (quarter of the
   firmament); whereas the orbs of the fixed stars in the lowest. And that
   animals are produced (in moisture [76] ) by evaporation from the sun.
   And that man was, originally, similar to a different animal, that is, a
   fish. And that winds are caused by the separation of very rarified
   exhalations of the atmosphere, and by their motion after they have been
   condensed.  And that rain arises from earth's giving back (the vapours
   which it receives) from the (clouds [77] ) under the sun. And that
   there are flashes of lightning when the wind coming down severs the
   clouds. This person was born in the third year of the xlii. Olympiad.
   [78]
     

   [71] Or, "men."

   [72] Or, "moist."

   [73] Or, "congealed snow."

   [74] That is, Antipodes. Diogenes Laertius was of the opinion that
   Plato first indicated by name the Antipodes.

   [75] Or, "727 times," an improbable reading.

   [76] "In moisture" is properly added, as Plutarch, in his De Placitis,
   v. xix., remarks that "Anaximander affirms that primary animals were
   produced in moisture."

   [77] This word seems requisite to the sense of the passage.

   [78] b.c. 610. On Olympiads, see Jarvis, Introd., p. 21.]
     

   Chapter VI.--Anaximenes; His System of "An Infinite Air;" His Views of
   Astronomy and Natural Phenomena.

   But Anaximenes, who himself was also a native of Miletus, and son of
   Eurystratus, affirmed that the originating principle is infinite air,
   out of which are generated things existing, those which have existed,
   and those that will be, as well as gods and divine (entities), and that
   the rest arise from the offspring of this. But that there is such a
   species of air, when it is most even, which is imperceptible to vision,
   but capable of being manifested by cold and heat, and moisture and
   motion, and that it is continually in motion; for that whatsoever
   things undergo alteration, do not change if there is not motion. For
   that it presents a different appearance according as it is condensed
   and attenuated, for when it is dissolved into what is more attenuated
   that fire is produced, and that when it is moderately condensed again
   into air that a cloud is formed from the air by virtue of the
   contraction; [79] but when condensed still more, water, (and) that when
   the condensation is carried still further, earth is formed; and when
   condensed to the very highest degree, stones. Wherefore, that the
   dominant principles of generation are contraries,--namely, heat and
   cold. And that the expanded earth is wafted along upon the air, and in
   like manner both sun and moon and the rest of the stars; for all things
   being of the nature of fire, are wafted about through the expanse of
   space, upon the air. And that the stars are produced from earth by
   reason of the mist which arises from this earth; and when this is
   attenuated, that fire is produced, and that the stars consist of the
   fire which is being borne aloft. But also that there are terrestrial
   natures in the region of the stars carried on along with them. And he
   says that the stars do not move under the earth, as some have supposed,
   but around the earth, [80] just as a cap is turned round our head; and
   that the sun is hid, not by being under the earth, but because covered
   by the higher portions of the earth, and on account of the greater
   distance that he is from us. But that the stars do not emit heat on
   account of the length of distance; and that the winds are produced when
   the condensed air, becoming rarified, is borne on; and that when
   collected and thickened still further, clouds are generated, and thus a
   change made into water. And that hail is produced when the water borne
   down from the clouds becomes congealed; and that snow is generated when
   these very clouds, being more moist, acquire congelation; and that
   lightning is caused when the clouds are parted by force of the winds;
   for when these are sundered there is produced a brilliant and fiery
   flash. And that a rainbow is produced by reason of the rays of the sun
   falling on the collected air. And that an earthquake takes place when
   the earth is altered into a larger (bulk) by heat and cold. These
   indeed, then, were the opinions of Anaximenes. This (philosopher)
   flourished about the first year of the lviii. Olympiad. [81]
     

   [79] Or, "revolutionary motion."

   [80] Plutarch, in his De Placitis Philosophorum, attributes both
   opinions to Anaximenes, viz., that the sun was moved both under and
   around the earth.

   [81] [b.c. 556.]
     

   Chapter VII.--Anaxagoras; His Theory of Mind; Recognises an Efficient
   Cause; His Cosmogony and Astronomy.

   After this (thinker) comes Anaxagoras, [82] son of Hegesibulus, [83] a
   native of Clazomenæ. This person affirmed the originating principle of
   the universe to be mind and matter; mind being the efficient cause,
   whereas matter that which was being formed. For all things coming into
   existence simultaneously, mind supervening introduced order. And
   material principles, he says, are infinite; even the smaller of these
   are infinite. [84] And that all things partake of motion by being moved
   by mind, and that similar bodies coalesce. And that celestial bodies
   were arranged by orbicular motion. That, therefore, what was thick and
   moist, and dark and cold, and all things heavy, came together into the
   centre, from the solidification of which earth derived support; but
   that the things opposite to these--namely, heat and brilliancy, and
   dryness and lightness--hurried impetuously into the farther portion of
   the atmosphere. And that the earth is in figure plane; and that it
   continues suspended aloft, by reason of its magnitude, and by reason of
   there being no vacuum, and by reason of the air, which was most
   powerful, bearing along the wafted earth. But that among moist
   substances on earth, was the sea, and the waters in it; and when these
   evaporated (from the sun), or had settled under, that the ocean was
   formed in this manner, as well as from the rivers that from time to
   time flow into it. And that the rivers also derive support from the
   rains and from the actual waters in the earth; for that this is hollow,
   and contains water in its caverns. And that the Nile is inundated in
   summer, by reason of the waters carried down into it from the snows in
   northern (latitudes). [85] And that the sun and moon and all the stars
   are fiery stones, that were rolled round by the rotation of the
   atmosphere. And that beneath the stars are sun and moon, and certain
   invisible bodies that are carried along with us; and that we have no
   perception of the heat of the stars, both on account of their being so
   far away, and on account of their distance from the earth; and further,
   they are not to the same degree hot as the sun, on account of their
   occupying a colder situation. And that the moon, being lower than the
   sun, is nearer us. And that the sun surpasses the Peloponnesus in size.
   And that the moon has not light of its own, but from the sun. But that
   the revolution of the stars takes place under the earth. And that the
   moon is eclipsed when the earth is interposed, and occasionally also
   those (stars) that are underneath the moon. And that the sun (is
   eclipsed) when, at the beginning of the month, the moon is interposed.
   And that the solstices are caused by both sun and moon being repulsed
   by the air. And that the moon is often turned, by its not being able to
   make head against the cold. This person was the first to frame
   definitions regarding eclipses and illuminations. And he affirmed that
   the moon is earthy, and has in it plains and ravines. And that the
   milky way is a reflection of the light of the stars which do not derive
   their radiance from the sun; [86] and that the stars, coursing (the
   firmament) as shooting sparks, arise out of the motion of the pole. And
   that winds are caused when the atmosphere is rarified by the sun, and
   by those burning orbs that advance under the pole, and are borne from
   (it). And that thunder and lightning are caused by heat falling on the
   clouds. And that earthquakes are produced by the air above falling on
   that under the earth; for when this is moved, that the earth also,
   being wafted by it, is shaken. And that animals originally came into
   existence [87] in moisture, and after this one from another; and that
   males are procreated when the seed secreted from the right parts
   adhered to the right parts of the womb, and that females are born when
   the contrary took place. This philosopher flourished in the first year
   of the lxxxviii. Olympiad, [88] at which time they say that Plato also
   was born. They maintain that Anaxagoras was likewise prescient.
     

   [82] Aristotle considers that Anaxagoras was the first to broach the
   existence of efficient causes in nature. He states, however, that
   Hermotimus received the credit of so doing at an earlier date.

   [83] Or, Hegesephontus.

   [84] Simplicius, in his Commentary on Aristotle's Physics, where (book
   i. c. 2) Anaxagoras is spoken of, says that the latter maintained that
   "all things existed simultaneously--infinite things, and plurality, and
   diminutiveness, for even what was diminutive was infinite."  (See
   Aristotle's Metaphysics, iii. 4, Macmahon's translation, p. 93.) This
   explains Hippolytus' remark, while it suggests an emendation of the
   text.

   [85] Or, "in the Antipodes;" or, "from the snow in Æthiopia."

   [86] Or, "overpowered by the sun," that is, whose light was lost in the
   superior brilliancy of the sun.

   [87] Or, "were generated."

   [88] [Died b.c. 428 or 429.]
     

   Chapter VIII.--Archelaus; System Akin to that of Anaxagoras; His Origin
   of the Earth and of Animals; Other Systems.

   Archelaus was by birth an Athenian, and son of Apollodorus. [89] This
   person, similarly with Anaxagoras, asserted the mixture of matter, and
   enunciated his first principles in the same manner. This philosopher,
   however, held that there is inherent immediately in mind a certain
   mixture; and that the originating principle of motion is the mutual
   separation of heat and cold, and that the heat is moved, and that the
   cold remains at rest. And that the water, being dissolved, flows
   towards the centre, where the scorched air and earth are produced, of
   which the one is borne upwards and the other remains beneath. And that
   the earth is at rest, and that on this account it came into existence;
   and that it lies in the centre, being no part, so to speak, of the
   universe, delivered from the conflagration; and that from this, first
   in a state of ignition, is the nature of the stars, of which indeed the
   largest is the sun, and next to this the moon; and of the rest some
   less, but some greater. And he says that the heaven was inclined at an
   angle, and so that the sun diffused light over the earth, and made the
   atmosphere transparent, and the ground dry; for that at first it was a
   sea, inasmuch as it is lofty at the horizon and hollow in the middle.
   And he adduces, as an indication of the hollowness, that the sun does
   not rise and set to all at the same time, which ought to happen if the
   earth was even. And with regard to animals, he affirms that the earth,
   being originally fire in its lower part, where the heat and cold were
   intermingled, both the rest of animals made their appearance, numerous
   and dissimilar, [90] all having the same food, being nourished from
   mud; and their existence was of short duration, but afterwards also
   generation from one another arose unto them; and men were separated
   from the rest (of the animal creation), and they appointed rulers, and
   laws, and arts, and cities, and the rest. And he asserts that mind is
   innate in all animals alike; for that each, according to the difference
   of their physical constitution, employed (mind), at one time slower, at
   another faster. [91]

   Natural philosophy, then, continued from Thales until Archelaus.
   Socrates was the hearer of this (latter philosopher). There are,
   however, also very many others, introducing various opinions respecting
   both the divinity and the nature of the universe; and if we were
   disposed to adduce all the opinions of these, it would be necessary to
   compose a vast quantity of books. But, reminding the reader of those
   whom we especially ought--who are deserving of mention from their fame,
   and from being, so to speak, the leaders to those who have subsequently
   framed systems of philosophy, and from their supplying them with a
   starting-point towards such undertakings--let us hasten on our
   investigations towards what remains for consideration.
     

   [89] [b.c. 440.]

   [90] Or, "both many of the rest of the animal kingdom, and man
   himself." (See Diogenes Laertius' Lives, ii. 17.)

   [91] There is some confusion in the text here, but the rendering given
   above, though conjectural, is highly probable. One proposed emendation
   would make the passage run thus: "for that each body employed mind,
   sometimes slower, sometimes faster."
     

   Chapter IX.--Parmenides; His Theory of "Unity;" His Eschatology.

   For Parmenides [92] likewise supposes the universe to be one, both
   eternal and unbegotten, and of a spherical form. And neither did he
   escape the opinion of the great body (of speculators), affirming fire
   and earth to be the originating principles of the universe--the earth
   as matter, but the fire as cause, even an efficient one. He asserted
   that the world would be destroyed, but in what way he does not mention.
   [93] The same (philosopher), however, affirmed the universe to be
   eternal, and not generated, and of spherical form and homogeneous, but
   not having a figure in itself, and immoveable and limited.
     

   [92] [b.c. 500.]

   [93] The next sentence is regarded by some as not genuine.
     

   Chapter X.--Leucippus; His Atomic Theory.

   But Leucippus, [94] an associate of Zeno, did not maintain the same
   opinion, but affirms things to be infinite, and always in motion, and
   that generation and change exist continuously. And he affirms plenitude
   and vacuum to be elements. And he asserts that worlds are produced when
   many bodies are congregated and flow together from the surrounding
   space to a common point, so that by mutual contact they made substances
   of the same figure and similar in form come into connection; and when
   thus intertwined, [95] there are transmutations into other bodies, and
   that created things wax and wane through necessity. But what the nature
   of necessity is, (Parmenides) did not define.
     

   [94] [b.c. 370.]

   [95] Or, "when again mutually connected, that different entities were
   generated." (See Diogenes Laertius' Lives, ix. 30-32.)
     

   Chapter XI.--Democritus; His Duality of Principles; His Cosmogony.

   And Democritus [96] was an acquaintance of Leucippus. Democritus, son
   of Damasippus, a native of Abdera, [97] conferring with many
   gymnosophists among the Indians, and with priests in Egypt, and with
   astrologers and magi in Babylon, (propounded his system).  Now he makes
   statements similarly with Leucippus concerning elements, viz.,
   plenitude and vacuum, denominating plenitude entity, and vacuum
   nonentity; and this he asserted, since existing things are continually
   moved in the vacuum. And he maintained worlds to be infinite, and
   varying in bulk; and that in some there is neither sun nor moon, while
   in others that they are larger than with us, and with others more
   numerous. And that intervals between worlds are unequal; and that in
   one quarter of space (worlds) are more numerous, and in another less
   so; and that some of them increase in bulk, but that others attain
   their full size, while others dwindle away and that in one quarter they
   are coming into existence, whilst in another they are failing; and that
   they are destroyed by clashing one with another. And that some worlds
   are destitute of animals and plants, and every species of moisture. And
   that the earth of our world was created before that of the stars, and
   that the moon is underneath; next (to it) the sun; then the fixed
   stars. And that (neither) the planets nor these (fixed stars) possess
   an equal elevation. And that the world flourishes, until no longer it
   can receive anything from without.  This (philosopher) turned all
   things into ridicule, as if all the concerns of humanity were deserving
   of laughter.
     

   [96] [Died in his hundred and ninth year, b.c. 361.]

   [97] Or, "Audera."
     

   Chapter XII.--Xenophanes; His Scepticism; His Notions of God and
   Nature; Believes in a Flood.

   But Xenophanes, a native of Colophon, [98] was son of Orthomenes. This
   man survived to the time of Cyrus. [99]   This (philosopher) first
   asserted that there is no possibility of comprehending anything,
   expressing himself thus:--

   "For if for the most part of perfection man may speak,

   Yet he knows it not himself, and in all attains surmise."

   And he affirms that nothing is generated or perishes, or is moved; and
   that the universe, being one, is beyond change. But he says that the
   deity is eternal, and one and altogether homogeneous and limited, and
   of a spherical form, and endued with perception in all parts. And that
   the sun exists during each day from a conglomeration of small sparks,
   and that the earth is infinite, and is surrounded neither by an
   atmosphere nor by the heaven. And that there are infinite suns and
   moons, and that all things spring from earth. This man affirmed that
   the sea is salt, on account of the many mixtures that flow into it.
   Metrodorus, however, from the fact of its being filtered through earth,
   asserts that it is on account of this that it is made salt. And
   Xenophanes is of opinion that there had been a mixture of the earth
   with the sea, and that in process of time it was disengaged from the
   moisture, alleging that he could produce such proofs as the following:
   that in the midst of earth, and in mountains, shells are discovered;
   and also in Syracuse he affirms was found in the quarries the print of
   a fish and of seals, and in Paros an image of a laurel [100] in the
   bottom of a stone, and in Melita [101] parts of all sorts of marine
   animals. And he says that these were generated when all things
   originally were embedded in mud, and that an impression of them was
   dried in the mud, but that all men had perished [102] when the earth,
   being precipitated into the sea, was converted into mud; then, again,
   that it originated generation, and that this overthrow occurred to all
   worlds.
     

   [98] [Born 556 b.c.]

   [99] [Incredible. Cyrus the younger, fell at Cunaxa b.c. 401. Cyrus the
   elder was a contemporary of Xenophanes.]

   [100] Or, "anchovy."

   [101] Or," Melitus."

   [102] The textual reading is in the present, but obviously requires a
   past tense.
     

   Chapter XIII.--Ecphantus; His Scepticism; Tenet of Infinity.

   One Ecphantus, a native of Syracuse, affirmed that it is not possible
   to attain a true knowledge of things. He defines, however, as he
   thinks, primary bodies to be indivisible, [103] and that there are
   three variations of these, viz., bulk, figure, capacity, from which are
   generated the objects of sense. But that there is a determinable
   multitude of these, and that this is infinite. [104] And that bodies
   are moved neither by weight nor by impact, but by divine power, which
   he calls mind and soul; and that of this the world is a representation;
   wherefore also it has been made in the form of a sphere by divine
   power. [105] And that the earth in the middle of the cosmical system is
   moved round its own centre towards the east. [106]
     

   [103] Some confusion has crept into the text. The first clause of the
   second sentence belongs probably to the first. The sense would then run
   thus: "Ecphantus affirmed the impossibility of dogmatic truth, for that
   every one was permitted to frame definitions as he thought proper."

   [104] Or, "that there is, according to this, a multitude of defined
   existences, and that such is infinite."

   [105] Or, "a single power."

   [106] [So far anticipating modern science.]
     

   Chapter XIV.--Hippo; His Duality of Principles; His Psychology.

   Hippo, a native of Rhegium, asserted as originating principles,
   coldness, for instance water, and heat, for instance fire. And that
   fire, when produced by water, subdued the power of its generator, and
   formed the world. And the soul, he said, is [107] sometimes brain, but
   sometimes water; for that also the seed is that which appears to us to
   arise out of moisture, from which, he says, the soul is produced.

   So far, then, we think we have sufficiently adduced (the opinions of)
   these; wherefore, inasmuch as we have adequately gone in review through
   the tenets of physical speculators, it seems to remain that we now turn
   to Socrates and Plato, who gave especial preference to moral
   philosophy.
     

   [107] Or, "holds."
     

   Chapter XV.--Socrates; His Philosophy Reproduced by Plato.

   Socrates, then, was a hearer of Archelaus, the natural philosopher; and
   he, reverencing the rule, "Know thyself," and having assembled a large
   school, had Plato (there), who was far superior to all his pupils.
   (Socrates) himself left no writings [108] after him.  Plato, however,
   taking notes [109] of all his (lectures on) wisdom, established a
   school, combining together natural, ethical, (and) logical
   (philosophy). But the points Plato determined are these following.
     

   [108] Or, "writing." Still Socrates may be called the father of the
   Greek philosophy. "From the age of Aristotle and Plato, the rise of the
   several Greek sects may be estimated as so many successful or abortive
   efforts to carry out the principles enunciated by
   Socrates."--Translator's Treatise on Metaphysics, chap. iii. p. 45.

   [109] This word signifies to take impressions from anything, which
   justifies the translation, historically correct, given above. Its
   literal import is "wipe clean," and in this sense Hippolytus may intend
   to assert that Plato wholly appropriated the philosophy of Socrates.
   (See Diogenes Laertius, xi. 61, where the same word occurs.)
     

   Chapter XVI.--Plato; Threefold Classification of Principles; His Idea
   of God; Different Opinions Regarding His Theology and Psychology; His
   Eschatology and System of Metempsychosis; His Ethical Doctrines;
   Notions on the Free-Will Question.

   Plato (lays down) that there are three originating principles of the
   universe, (namely) God, and matter, and exemplar; God as the Maker and
   Regulator of this universe, and the Being who exercises providence over
   it; but matter, as that which underlies all (phenomena), which (matter)
   he styles both receptive and a nurse, out of the arrangement of which
   proceeded the four elements of which the world consists; (I mean) fire,
   air, earth, water, from which all the rest of what are denominated
   concrete substances, as well as animals and plants, have been formed.
   And that the exemplar, which he likewise calls ideas, is the
   intelligence of the Deity, to which, as to an image in the soul, the
   Deity attending, fabricated all things.  God, he says, is both
   incorporeal and shapeless, and comprehensible by wise men solely;
   whereas matter is body potentially, but with potentiality not as yet
   passing into action, for being itself without form and without quality,
   by assuming forms and qualities, it became body. That matter,
   therefore, is an originating principle, and coeval with the Deity, and
   that in this respect the world is uncreated. For (Plato) affirms that
   (the world) was made out of it. And that (the attribute of)
   imperishableness necessarily belongs to (literally "follows") that
   which is uncreated. So far forth, however, as body is supposed to be
   compounded out of both many qualities and ideas, so far forth it is
   both created and perishable. But some of the followers of Plato mingled
   both of these, employing some such example as the following: That as a
   waggon can always continue undestroyed, though undergoing partial
   repairs from time to time, so that even the parts each in turn perish,
   yet itself remains always complete; so after this manner the world
   also, although in parts it perishes, yet the things that are removed,
   being repaired, and equivalents for them being introduced, it remains
   eternal.

   Some maintain that Plato asserts the Deity to be one, ingenerable and
   incorruptible, as he says in The Laws: [110]   "God, therefore, as the
   ancient account has it, possesses both the beginning, and end, and
   middle of all things." Thus he shows God to be one, on account of His
   having pervaded all things. Others, however, maintain that Plato
   affirms the existence of many gods indefinitely, when he uses these
   words:  "God of gods, of whom I am both the Creator and Father." [111]
   But others say that he speaks of a definite number of deities in the
   following passage: "Therefore the mighty Jupiter, wheeling his swift
   chariot in heaven;" and when he enumerates the offspring of the
   children of heaven and earth. But others assert that (Plato)
   constituted the gods as generable; and on account of their having been
   produced, that altogether they were subject to the necessity of
   corruption, but that on account of the will of God they are immortal,
   (maintaining this) in the passage already quoted, where, to the words,
   "God of gods, of whom I am Creator and Father," he adds, "indissoluble
   through the fiat of My will;" so that if (God) were disposed that these
   should be dissolved, they would easily be dissolved.

   And he admits natures (such as those) of demons, and says that some of
   them are good, but others worthless. And some affirm that he states the
   soul to be uncreated and immortal, when he uses the following words,
   "Every soul is immortal, for that which is always moved is immortal;"
   and when he demonstrates that the soul is self-moved, and capable of
   originating motion.  Others, however, (say that Plato asserted that the
   soul was) created, but rendered imperishable through the will of God.
   But some (will have it that he considered the soul) a composite
   (essence), and generable and corruptible; for even he supposes that
   there is a receptacle for it, [112] and that it possesses a luminous
   body, but that everything generated involves a necessity of corruption.
   [113] Those, however, who assert the immortality of the soul are
   especially strengthened in their opinion by those passages [114] (in
   Plato's writings), where he says, that both there are judgments after
   death, and tribunals of justice in Hades, and that the virtuous (souls)
   receive a good reward, while the wicked (ones) suitable punishment.
   Some notwithstanding assert, that he also acknowledges a transition of
   souls from one body to another, and that different souls, those that
   were marked out for such a purpose, pass into different bodies, [115]
   according to the desert of each, and that after [116] certain definite
   periods they are sent up into this world to furnish once more a proof
   of their choice.  Others, however, (do not admit this to be his
   doctrine, but will have it that Plato affirms that the souls) obtain a
   place according to the desert of each; and they employ as a testimony
   the saying of his, that some good men are with Jove, and that others
   are ranging abroad (through heaven) with other gods; whereas that
   others are involved in eternal punishments, as many as during this life
   have committed wicked and unjust deeds.

   And people affirm that Plato says, that some things are without a mean,
   that others have a mean, that others are a mean. (For example, that)
   waking and sleep, and such like, are conditions without an intermediate
   state; but that there are things that had means, for instance virtue
   and vice; and there are means (between extremes), for instance grey
   between white and black, or some other colour. And they say, that he
   affirms that the things pertaining to the soul are absolutely alone
   good, but that the things pertaining to the body, and those external
   (to it), are not any longer absolutely good, but reputed blessings. And
   that frequently he names these means also, for that it is possible to
   use them both well and ill. Some virtues, therefore, he says, are
   extremes in regard of intrinsic worth, but in regard of their essential
   nature means, for nothing is more estimable than virtue. But whatever
   excels or falls short of these terminates in vice. For instance, he
   says that there are four virtues--prudence, temperance, justice,
   fortitude--and that on each of these is attendant two vices, according
   to excess and defect: for example, on prudence, recklessness according
   to defect, and knavery according to excess; and on temperance,
   licentiousness according to defect, stupidity according to excess; and
   on justice, foregoing a claim according to defect, unduly pressing it
   according to excess; and on fortitude, cowardice according to defect,
   foolhardiness according to excess. And that these virtues, when
   inherent in a man, render him perfect, and afford him happiness. And
   happiness, he says, is assimilation to the Deity, as far as this is
   possible; and that assimilation to God takes place when any one
   combines holiness and justice with prudence.  For this he supposes the
   end of supreme wisdom and virtue. And he affirms that the virtues
   follow one another in turn, [117] and are uniform, and are never
   antagonistic to each other; whereas that vices are multiform, and
   sometimes follow one the other, and sometimes are antagonistic to each
   other. He asserts that fate exists; not, to be sure, that all things
   are produced according to fate, but that there is even something in our
   power, as in the passages where he says, "The fault is his who chooses,
   God is blameless;" and "the following law [118] of Adrasteia." [119]
   And thus some (contend for his upholding) a system of fate, whereas
   others one of free-will. He asserts, however, that sins are
   involuntary. For into what is most glorious of the things in our power,
   which is the soul, no one would (deliberately) admit what is vicious,
   that is, transgression, but that from ignorance and an erroneous
   conception of virtue, supposing that they were achieving something
   honourable, they pass into vice. And his doctrine on this point is most
   clear in The Republic, [120] where he says, "But, again, you presume to
   assert that vice is disgraceful and abhorred of God; how then, I may
   ask, would one choose such an evil thing? He, you reply, (would do so)
   who is worsted by pleasures. [121] Therefore this also is involuntary,
   if to gain a victory be voluntary; so that, in every point of view, the
   committing an act of turpitude, reason proves [122] to be involuntary."
   Some one, however, in opposition to this (Plato), advances the contrary
   statement, "Why then are men punished if they sin involuntary?" But he
   replies, that he himself also, as soon as possible, may be emancipated
   from vice, and undergo punishment. For that the undergoing punishment
   is not an evil, but a good thing, if it is likely to prove a
   purification of evils; and that the rest of mankind, hearing of it, may
   not transgress, but guard against such an error. (Plato, however,
   maintains) that the nature of evil is neither created by the Deity, nor
   possesses subsistence of itself, but that it derives existence from
   contrariety to what is good, and from attendance upon it, either by
   excess and defect, as we have previously affirmed concerning the
   virtues.  Plato unquestionably then, as we have already stated,
   collecting together the three departments of universal philosophy, in
   this manner formed his speculative system.
     

   [110] De Legibus, iv. 7 (p. 109, vol. viii. ed. Bekker).

   [111] Timæus, c. xvi. (p. 277, vol. vii. ed. Bekker). The passage runs
   thus in the original: "Gods of gods, of whom I am Creator and Father of
   works, which having been formed by Me, are indissoluble, through, at
   all events, My will."

   [112] The word is literally a cup or bowl, and, being employed by Plato
   in an allegorical sense, is evidently intended to signify the anima
   mundi (soul of the world), which constituted a sort of depository for
   all spiritual existences in the world.

   [113] Or, "that there exists a necessity for the corruption of
   everything created."

   [114] Or, "are confirmed by that (philosopher Plato), because he
   asserts," etc.; or, "those who assert the soul's immortality are
   especially confirmed in their opinion, as many as affirm the existence
   of a future state of retribution."

   [115] Or, "that he changes different souls," etc.

   [116] Or, "during."

   [117] Diogenes Laertius, in describing the system of the Stoics,
   employs the same word in the case of their view of virtue.

   [118] This is supplied from the original; the passage occurs in the
   Phædrus, c. lx. (p. 86, vol. i. ed. Bekker).

   [119] The word Adrasteia was a name for Nemesis, and means here
   unalterable destiny.

   [120] The passage occurs in Clilophon (p. 244, vol. vi. ed. Bekker).

   [121] The text, as given by Miller, is scarcely capable of any meaning.
   The translation is therefore conjectural, in accordance with
   alterations proposed by Schneidewin.

   [122] Or, "declares."
     

   Chapter XVII.--Aristotle; Duality of Principles; His Categories; His
   Psychology; His Ethical Doctrines; Origin of the Epithet "Peripatetic."

   Aristotle, who was a pupil of this (Plato), reduced philosophy into an
   art, and was distinguished rather for his proficiency in logical
   science, supposing as the elements of all things substance and
   accident; that there is one substance underlying all things, but nine
   accidents,--namely, quantity, quality, relation, where, when,
   possession, posture, action, passion; and that substance is of some
   such description as God, man, and each of the beings that can fall
   under a similar denomination. But in regard of accidents, quality is
   seen in, for instance, white, black; and quantity, for instance two
   cubits, three cubits; and relation, for instance father, son; and
   where, for instance at Athens, Megara; and when, for instance during
   the tenth Olympiad; and possession, for instance to have acquired; and
   action, for instance to write, and in general to evince any practical
   powers; and posture, for instance to lie down; and passion, for
   instance to be struck. He also supposes that some things have means,
   but that others are without means, as we have declared concerning Plato
   likewise. And in most points he is in agreement with Plato, except the
   opinion concerning soul. For Plato affirms it to be immortal, but
   Aristotle that it involves permanence; and after these things, that
   this also vanishes in the fifth body, [123] which he supposes, along
   with the other four (elements),--viz., fire, and earth, and water, and
   air,--to be a something more subtle (than these), of the nature of
   spirit. Plato therefore says, that the only really good things are
   those pertaining to the soul, and that they are sufficient for
   happiness; whereas Aristotle introduces a threefold classification of
   good things, and asserts that the wise man is not perfect, unless there
   are present to him both the good things of the body and those extrinsic
   to it. [124] The former are beauty, strength, vigour of the senses,
   soundness; while the things extrinsic (to the body) are wealth,
   nobility, glory, power, peace, friendship. [125] And the inner
   qualities of the soul he classifies, as it was the opinion of Plato,
   under prudence, temperance, justice, fortitude. This (philosopher) also
   affirms that evils arise according to an opposition of the things that
   are good, and that they exist beneath the quarter around the moon, but
   reach no farther beyond the moon; and that the soul of the entire world
   is immortal, and that the world itself is eternal, but that (the soul)
   in an individual, as we have before stated, vanishes (in the fifth
   body). This (speculator), then holding discussions in the Lyceum, drew
   up from time to time his system of philosophy; but Zeno (held his
   school) in the porch called Poecilé. And the followers of Zeno obtained
   their name from the place--that is, from Stoa--(i.e., a porch), being
   styled Stoics; whereas Aristotle's followers (were denominated) from
   their mode of employing themselves while teaching. For since they were
   accustomed walking about in the Lyceum to pursue their investigations,
   on this account they were called Peripatetics. These indeed, then, were
   the doctrines of Aristotle.
     

   [123] Or, "the fifth body, in which it is supposed to be, along with
   the other four (elements);" or, "the fifth body, which is supposed to
   be (composed) of the other four."

   [124] Hippolytus expresses himself in the words of Stobæus, who says
   (Eclog., ii. 274): "And among reputed external blessings are nobility,
   wealth, glory, peace, freedom, friendship."

   [125] Or, "glory, the confirmed power of friends."
     

   Chapter XVIII.--The Stoics; Their Superiority in Logic; Fatalists;
   Their Doctrine of Conflagrations.

   The Stoics themselves also imparted growth to philosophy, in respect of
   a greater development of the art of syllogism, and included almost
   everything under definitions, both Chrysippus and Zeno being coincident
   in opinion on this point.  And they likewise supposed God to be the one
   originating principle of all things, being a body of the utmost
   refinement, and that His providential care pervaded everything; and
   these speculators were positive about the existence of fate everywhere,
   employing some such example as the following: that just as a dog,
   supposing him attached to a car, if indeed he is disposed to follow,
   both is drawn, [126] or follows voluntarily, making an exercise also of
   free power, in combination with necessity, that is, fate; but if he may
   not be disposed to follow, he will altogether be coerced to do so. And
   the same, of course, holds good in the case of men. For though not
   willing to follow, they will altogether be compelled to enter upon what
   has been decreed for them. (The Stoics), however, assert that the soul
   abides after death, [127] but that it is a body, and that such is
   formed from the refrigeration of the surrounding atmosphere; wherefore,
   also, that it was called psyche (i.e., soul). And they acknowledge
   likewise, that there is a transition of souls from one body to another,
   that is, for those souls for whom this migration has been destined. And
   they accept the doctrine, that there will be a conflagration, a
   purification of this world, some say the entire of it, but others a
   portion, and that (the world) itself is undergoing partial destruction;
   and this all but corruption, and the generation from it of another
   world, they term purgation. And they assume the existence of all
   bodies, and that body does not pass through body, [128] but that a
   refraction [129] takes place, and that all things involve plenitude,
   and that there is no vacuum.  The foregoing are the opinions of the
   Stoics also.
     

   [126] One of the mss. elucidates the simile in the text thus: "But if
   he is not disposed, there is absolutely a necessity for his being drawn
   along. And in like manner men, if they do not follow fate, seem to be
   free agents, though the reason of (their being) fate holds assuredly
   valid. If, however, they do not wish to follow, they will absolutely be
   coerced to enter upon what has been fore-ordained."

   [127] Or, "is immortal." Diogenes Laertius (book vii.) notices, in his
   section on Zeno, as part of the Stoic doctrine, "that the soul abides
   after death, but that it is perishable."

   [128] Or, "through what is incorporeal;" that is, through what is void
   or empty space.

   [129] Or, "resurrection;" or, "resistance;" that is, a resisting
   medium.
     

   Chapter XIX.--Epicurus; Adopts the Democritic Atomism; Denial of Divine
   Providence; The Principle of His Ethical System.

   Epicurus, however, advanced an opinion almost contrary to all. He
   supposed, as originating principles of all things, atoms and vacuity.
   [130] He considered vacuity as the place that would contain the things
   that will exist, and atoms the matter out of which all things could be
   formed; and that from the concourse of atoms both the Deity derived
   existence, and all the elements, and all things inherent in them, as
   well as animals and other (creatures); so that nothing was generated or
   existed, unless it be from atoms.  And he affirmed that these atoms
   were composed of extremely small particles, in which there could not
   exist either a point or a sign, or any division; wherefore also he
   called them atoms. Acknowledging the Deity to be eternal and
   incorruptible, he says that God has providential care for nothing, and
   that there is no such thing at all as providence or fate, but that all
   things are made by chance.  For that the Deity reposed in the
   intermundane spaces, (as they) are thus styled by him; for outside the
   world he determined that there is a certain habitation of God,
   denominated "the intermundane spaces," and that the Deity surrendered
   Himself to pleasure, and took His ease in the midst of supreme
   happiness; and that neither has He any concerns of business, nor does
   He devote His attention to them. [131] As a consequence on these
   opinions, he also propounded his theory concerning wise men, asserting
   that the end of wisdom is pleasure. Different persons, however,
   received the term "pleasure" in different acceptations; for some (among
   the Gentiles [132] understood) the passions, but others the
   satisfaction resulting from virtue. And he concluded that the souls of
   men are dissolved along with their bodies, just as also they were
   produced along with them, for that they are blood, and that when this
   has gone forth or been altered, the entire man perishes; and in keeping
   with this tenet, (Epicurus maintained) that there are neither trials in
   Hades, nor tribunals of justice; so that whatsoever any one may commit
   in this life, that, provided he may escape detection, he is altogether
   beyond any liability of trial (for it in a future state). In this way,
   then, Epicurus also formed his opinions.
     

   [130] The atomic theory is, as already mentioned by Hippolytus, of more
   ancient date than Epicurus' age, being first broached by Leucippus and
   Democritus. This fact, however, has, as Cudworth argues, been
   frequently overlooked by those who trace the doctrine to no older a
   source than the founder of the Epicurean philosophy.

   [131] Or, "that neither has He business to do, nor does He attend to
   any. As a consequence of which fact," etc.

   [132] "Among the Gentiles" seems a mistake. One reading proposed is,
   "some (intended) our sensuous passions;" or, "some understood the
   passions." The words "among the Gentiles," the French commentator, the
   Abbe Cruice, is of opinion, were added by Christian hands, in order to
   draw a contrast between the virtuous Christian and the vicious pagan.
     

   Chapter XX.--The Academics; Difference of Opinion Among Them.

   And another opinion of the philosophers was called that of the
   Academics, [133] on account of those holding their discussions in the
   Academy, of whom the founder Pyrrho, from whom they were called
   Pyrrhonean philosophers, first introduced the notion of the
   incomprehensibility of all things, so as to (be ready to) attempt an
   argument on either side of a question, but not to assert anything for
   certain; for that there is nothing of things intelligible or sensible
   true, but that they appear to men to be so; and that all substance is
   in a state of flux and change, and never continues in the same
   (condition). Some followers, then, of the Academics say that one ought
   not to declare an opinion on the principle of anything, but simply
   making the attempt to give it up; whereas others subjoined the
   formulary "not rather" [134] (this than that), saying that the fire is
   not rather fire than anything else. But they did not declare what this
   is, but what sort it is. [135]
     

   [133] See Diogenes Laertius' Lives, x. 63 (Bohn's Library); Plutarch,
   De Placitis Philosophorum, iv. 3.

   [134] Diogenes Laertius, Lives, ix. 75; Sextus Empiricus, Hypotyp., i.
   188-192.

   [135] This is what the Academics called "the phenomenon" (Sextus
   Empiricus, Pyrrh. Hyp., i. 19-22).
     

   Chapter XXI.--The Brachmans; Their Mode of Life; Ideas of Deity;
   Different Sorts Of; Their Ethical Notions.

   But there is also with the Indians a sect composed of those
   philosophizing among the Brachmans. They spend a contented existence,
   abstain both from living creatures and all cooked food, being satisfied
   with fruits; and not gathering these from the trees, but carrying off
   those that have fallen to the earth. They subsist upon them, drinking
   the water of the river Tazabena. [136] But they pass their life naked,
   affirming that the body has been constituted a covering to the soul by
   the Deity. These affirm that God is light, not such as one sees, nor
   such as the sun and fire; but to them the Deity is discourse, not that
   which finds expression in articulate sounds, but that of the knowledge
   through which the secret mysteries of nature [137] are perceived by the
   wise. And this light which they say is discourse, their god, they
   assert that the Brachmans only know on account of their alone rejecting
   all vanity of opinion which is the soul's ultimate covering. [138]
   These despise death, and always in their own peculiar language [139]
   call God by the name which we have mentioned previously, and they send
   up hymns (to him). But neither are there women among them, nor do they
   beget children. But they who aim at a life similar to these, after they
   have crossed over to the country on the opposite side of the river,
   continue to reside there, returning no more; and these also are called
   Brachmans. But they do not pass their life similarly, for there are
   also in the place women, of whom those that dwell there are born, and
   in turn beget children. And this discourse which [140] they name God
   they assert to be corporeal, and enveloped in a body outside himself,
   just as if one were wearing a sheep's skin, but that on divesting
   himself of body that he would appear clear to the eye. But the
   Brachmans say that there is a conflict in the body that surrounds them,
   (and they consider that the body is for them full of conflicts); [141]
   in opposition to which, as if marshalled for battle against enemies,
   they contend, as we have already explained. And they say that all men
   are captive to their own congenital struggles, viz., sensuality and
   inchastity, gluttony, anger, joy, sorrow, concupiscence, and such like.
   And he who has reared a trophy over these, alone goes to God; wherefore
   the Brachmans deify Dandamis, to whom Alexander the Macedonian paid a
   visit, as one who had proved victorious in the bodily conflict. But
   they bear down on Calanus as having profanely withdrawn from their
   philosophy. But the Brachmans, putting off the body, like fishes
   jumping out of water into the pure air, behold the sun.
     

   [136] This is a mistake in the manuscript for Ganges, according to
   Roeper.

   [137] Or, "knowledge." (See Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., i., xv.,
   lxxii.; Eusebius, Præparat. Evang., ix. 6.)

   [138] Athenæus (Deipn., book ix.) ascribes this opinion to Plato, who,
   he tells us, "asserted that the soul was so constituted, that it should
   reject its last covering, that of vanity."

   [139] Or, "they name light their god;" or, "they celebrate in their own
   peculiar language God, whom they name," etc.

   [140] The text here would seem rather confused. The above translation
   agrees with Cruice's and Schneidewin's Latin version. I have doubts
   about its correctness, however, and would render it thus:
   "...enveloped in a body extrinsic to the divine essence, just as if one
   wore a sheepskin covering; but that his body, on being divested of this
   (covering), would appear visible to the naked eye." Or, "This discourse
   whom they name God they affirm to be incorporeal, but enveloped in a
   body outside himself (or his own body) (just as if one carried a
   covering of sheepskin to have it seen); but having stripped off the
   body in which he is enveloped, that he no longer appears visible to the
   naked eye."  (Roeper.) I am not very confident that this exactly
   conveys the meaning of Roeper's somewhat obscure Greek paraphrase.

   [141] The parenthetical words Roeper considers introduced into the text
   from a marginal note.
     

   Chapter XXII.--The Druids; Progenitors of Their System.

   And the Celtic Druids investigated to the very highest point the
   Pythagorean philosophy, after Zamolxis, [142] by birth a Thracian,
   [143] a servant of Pythagoras, became to them the originator of this
   discipline. Now after the death of Pythagoras, Zamolxis, repairing
   thither, became to them the originator of this philosophy. The Celts
   esteem these as prophets and seers, on account of their foretelling to
   them certain (events), from calculations and numbers by the Pythagorean
   art; on the methods of which very art also we shall not keep silence,
   since also from these some have presumed to introduce heresies; but the
   Druids resort to magical rites likewise.
     

   [142] Or "Zamalxis," or "Zametris" (see Menagius on Diogenes Laertius,
   viii. 2).

   [143] Or, "of Thracian origin." The words are omitted in two mss.
     

   Chapter XXIII.--Hesiod; The Nine Muses; The Hesiodic Cosmogony; The
   Ancient Speculators, Materialists; Derivative Character of the Heresies
   from Heathen Philosophy.

   But Hesiod the poet asserts himself also that he thus heard from the
   Muses concerning nature, and that the Muses are the daughters of
   Jupiter. For when for nine nights and days together, Jupiter, through
   excess of passion, had uninterruptedly lain with Mnemosyne, that
   Mnemosyne conceived in one womb those nine Muses, becoming pregnant
   with one during each night. Having then summoned the nine Muses from
   Pieria, that is, Olympus, he exhorted them to undergo instruction:--

   "How first both gods and earth were made, [144]

   And rivers, and boundless deep, and ocean's surge,

   And glittering stars, and spacious heaven above;

   How they grasped the crown and shared the glory,

   And how at first they held the many-valed Olympus.

   These (truths), ye Muses, tell me of, saith he,

   From first, and next which of them first arose.

   Chaos, no doubt, the very first, arose; but next

   Wide-stretching Earth, ever the throne secure of all

   Immortals, who hold the peaks of white Olympus;

   And breezy Tartarus in wide earth's recess;

   And Love, who is most beauteous of the gods immortal,

   Chasing care away from all the gods and men,

   Quells in breasts the mind and counsel sage.

   But Erebus from Chaos and gloomy Night arose;

   And, in turn, from Night both Air and Day were born;

   But primal Earth, equal to self in sooth begot

   The stormy sky to veil it round on every side,

   Ever to be for happy gods a throne secure.

   And forth she brought the towering hills, the pleasant haunts

   Of nymphs who dwell throughout the woody heights.

   And also barren Sea begat the surge-tossed

   Flood, apart from luscious Love; but next

   Embracing Heaven, she Ocean bred with eddies deep,

   And Cæus, and Crius, and Hyperian, and Iapetus,

   And Thia, and Rhea, and Themis, and Mnemosyne,

   And gold-crowned Phoebe, and comely Tethys.

   But after these was born last [145] the wiley Cronus,

   Fiercest of sons; but he abhorred his blooming sire,

   And in turn the Cyclops bred, who owned a savage breast."

   And all the rest of the giants from Cronus, Hesiod enumerates, and
   somewhere afterwards that Jupiter was born of Rhea. All these, then,
   made the foregoing statements in their doctrine regarding both the
   nature and generation of the universe. But all, sinking below what is
   divine, busied themselves concerning the substance of existing things,
   [146] being astonished at the magnitude of creation, and supposing that
   it constituted the Deity, each speculator selecting in preference a
   different portion of the world; failing, however, to discern the God
   and maker of these.

   The opinions, therefore, of those who have attempted to frame systems
   of philosophy among the Greeks, I consider that we have sufficiently
   explained; and from these the heretics, taking occasion, have
   endeavoured to establish the tenets that will be after a short time
   declared. It seems, however, expedient, that first explaining the
   mystical rites and whatever imaginary doctrines some have laboriously
   framed concerning the stars, or magnitudes, to declare these; for
   heretics likewise, taking occasion from them, are considered by the
   multitude to utter prodigies. Next in order we shall elucidate the
   feeble opinions advanced by these.

   Books II. And III. Are Awanting.
     

   [144] There are several verbal differences from the original in
   Hippolytus' version. These may be seen on comparing it with Hesiod's
   own text. The particular place which Hesiod occupies in the history of
   philosophy is pointed out by Aristotle in his Metaphysics. The
   Stagyrite detects in the Hesiodic cosmogony, in the principle of
   "love," the dawn of a recognition of the necessity of an efficient
   cause to account for the phenomena of nature. It was Aristotle himself,
   however, who built up the science of causation; and in this respect
   humanity owes that extraordinary man a deep debt of gratitude.

   [145] Or "youngest," or "most vigorous." This is Hesiod's word, which
   signifies literally, "fittest for bearing arms" (for service, as we
   say).

   [146] "The majority of those who first formed systems of philosophy,
   consider those that subsist in a form of matter, to be alone the
   principle of all things."--Aristotle's Metaphysics, book i. c. iii. p.
   13 (Bohn's ed.).