Book V.

   ------------------------

   Contents.

   The following are the contents of the fifth book of the Refutation of
   all Heresies: [313] --

   What the assertions are of the Naasseni, who style themselves Gnostics,
   and that they advance those opinions which the Philosophers of the
   Greeks previously propounded, as well as those who have handed down
   mystical (rites), from (both of) whom the Naasseni taking occasion,
   have constructed their heresies.

   And what are the tenets of the Peratæ, and that their system is not
   framed by them out of the holy Scriptures, but from astrological art.

   What is the doctrine of the Sethians, [314] and that, purloining [315]
   their theories from the wise men among the Greeks, they have patched
   together their own system out of shreds of opinion taken from Musæus,
   and Linus, and Orpheus.

   What are the tenets of Justinus, and that his system is framed by him,
   not out of the holy Scriptures, but from the detail of marvels
   furnished by Herodotus the historian.
     

   [313] [Consult Bunsen, vol. i. p. 35, always interesting and
   ingeniously critical; nobody should neglect his work. But for a
   judicial mind, compare Dr. Wordsworth, p. 182.]

   [314] The ms. employs the form Sithians, which is obviously not the
   correct one.

   [315] This term klepsilogos is frequently applied by Hippolytus to the
   heretics.
     

   Chapter I.--Recapitulation; Characteristics of Heresy; Origin of the
   Name Naasseni; The System of the Naasseni.

   I think that in the four preceding books I have very elaborately
   explained the opinions propounded by all the speculators among both
   Greeks and Barbarians, respecting the Divine Nature and the creation of
   the world; and not even have I omitted [316] the consideration of their
   systems of magic. So that I have for my readers undergone no ordinary
   amount of toil, in my anxiety to urge many forward into a desire of
   learning, and into stedfastness of knowledge in regard of the truth. It
   remains, therefore, to hasten on to the refutation of the heresies; but
   it is for the purpose of furnishing this (refutation) that we have put
   forward the statements already made by us. For from philosophers the
   heresiarchs deriving [317] starting-points, (and) like cobblers
   patching together, according to their own particular interpretation,
   the blunders of the ancients, have advanced them as novelties to those
   that are capable of being deceived, as we shall prove in the following
   books. In the remainder (of our work), the opportunity invites us to
   approach the treatment of our proposed subjects, and to begin from
   those who have presumed to celebrate a serpent, [318] the originator of
   the error (in question), through certain expressions devised by the
   energy of his own (ingenuity). The priests, then, and champions of the
   system, have been first those who have been called Naasseni, [319]
   being so denominated from the Hebrew language, for the serpent is
   called naas [320] (in Hebrew). Subsequently, however, they have styled
   themselves Gnostics, alleging that they alone have sounded the depths
   of knowledge. Now, from the system of these (speculators), many,
   detaching parts, have constructed a heresy which, though with several
   subdivisions, is essentially one, and they explain precisely the same
   (tenets); though conveyed under the guise of different opinions, as the
   following discussion, according as it progresses, will prove.

   These (Naasseni), then, according to the system [321] advanced by them,
   magnify, (as the originating cause) of all things else, a man and a son
   of man.  And this man is a hermaphrodite, and is denominated among them
   Adam; and hymns many and various are made to him. The hymns [322]
   however--to be brief--are couched among them in some such form as this:
   "From thee (comes) father, and through thee (comes) mother, two names
   immortal, progenitors of Æons, O denizen of heaven, thou illustrious
   man." But they divide him as Geryon [323] into three parts. For, say
   they, of this man one part is rational, another psychical, another
   earthly. And they suppose that the knowledge of him is the originating
   principle of the capacity for a knowledge of God, expressing themselves
   thus: "The originating principle of perfection is the knowledge [324]
   of man, while the knowledge of God is absolute perfection."  All these
   qualities, however--rational, and psychical, and earthly--have, (the
   Naassene) says, retired and descended into one man
   simultaneously--Jesus, [325] who was born of Mary. And these three men
   (the Naassene) says, are in the habit of speaking (through Jesus) at
   the same time together, each from their own proper substances to those
   peculiarly their own. For, according to these, there are three kinds of
   all existent things--angelic, psychical, earthly; and there are three
   churches--angelic, psychical, earthly; and the names of these are
   elect, called, captive.
     

   [316] Miller has apokalupsas for paraleipsas.  This, however, can bear
   no intelligible meaning, except we add some other word, as thus: "not
   even have I failed to disclose." Schneidewin's correction of
   apokalupsas into paraleipsas is obviously an improvement.

   [317] Metalabontes; some read metaschontes, which it is presumed might
   be rendered, "sharing in the opinions which gave occasion to these
   heterodox doctrines."

   [318] i.e., ophis. This term has created the title "Ophites," which may
   be regarded as the generic denomination for all the advocates of this
   phase of Gnosticism.

   [319] The heresy of the Naasseni is adverted to by the other leading
   writers on heresy in the early age of the Church. See St. Irenæus, i.
   34; Origen, Contr. Cels., vi. 28 (p. 291 et seq. ed. Spenc.);
   Tertullian, Præscr., c. 47; Theodoret, Hæretic. Fabul., i. 14;
   Epiphanius, Advers. Hæreses., xxv. and xxxvii.; St. Augustine, De
   Hæres., xvii.; Jerome, Comment. Epist. ad Galat., lib. ii. The Abbe
   Cruice reminds his readers that the Naasseni carried their doctrines
   into India, and refers to the Asiatic Researches (vol. x. p. 39).

   [320] The Hebrew word is nchs (nachash).

   [321] para ton auton logon. Bernaysius suggests for these words, patera
   to auto logo.  Schneidewin regards the emendation as an error, and
   Bunsen partly so. The latter would read, patera ton auton Logon, i.e.,
   "The Naasseni honour the Father of all existent things, the Logos, as
   man and the Son of Man."

   [322] See Irenæus, Hær., i. 1.

   [323] Geryon (see note, chap. iii.) is afterwards mentioned as a
   synonyme with Jordan, i.e., "flowing from earth" (ge rhuon).

   [324] gnosis,--a term often alluded to by St. John, and which gives its
   name "Gnosticism" to the various forms of the Ophitic heresy. The
   aphorism in the text is one that embodies a grand principle which lies
   at the root of all correct philosophy. In this and other instances it
   will be found that the system, however wild and incoherent in its
   theology, of the Naaseni and of some of the other Gnostic sects, was
   one which was constructed by a subtle analysis of thought, and by
   observation of nature.

   [325] The Abbe Cruice remarks on this passage, that, as the statement
   here as regards Jesus Christ does not correspond with Origen's remarks
   on the opinions of the Naasseni in reference to our Lord, the
   Philosophumena cannot be the work of Origen.
     

   Chapter II.--Naasseni Ascribe Their System, Through Mariamne, to James
   the Lord's Brother; Really Traceable to the Ancient Mysteries; Their
   Psychology as Given in the "Gospel According to Thomas;" Assyrian
   Theory of the Soul; The Systems of the Naasseni and the Assyrians
   Compared; Support Drawn by the Naasseni from the Phrygian and Egyptian
   Mysteries; The Mysteries of Isis; These Mysteries Allegorized by the
   Naasseni.

   These are the heads of very numerous discourses which (the Naassene)
   asserts James the brother of the Lord handed down to Mariamne. [326] In
   order, then, that these impious (heretics) may no longer belie Mariamne
   or James, or the Saviour Himself, let us come to the mystic rites
   (whence these have derived their figment),--to a consideration, if it
   seems right, of both the Barbarian and Grecian (mysteries),--and let us
   see how these (heretics), collecting together the secret and ineffable
   mysteries of all the Gentiles, are uttering falsehoods against Christ,
   and are making dupes of those who are not acquainted with these orgies
   of the Gentiles. For since the foundation of the doctrine with them is
   the man Adam, and they say that concerning him it has been written,
   "Who shall declare his generation?" [327] learn how, partly deriving
   from the Gentiles the undiscoverable and diversified [328] generation
   of the man, they fictitiously apply it to Christ.

   "Now earth," [329] say the Greeks, "gave forth a man, (earth) first
   bearing a goodly gift, wishing to become mother not of plants devoid of
   sense, nor beasts without reason, but of a gentle and highly favoured
   creature." "It, however, is difficult," (the Naassene) says, "to
   ascertain whether Alalcomeneus, [330] first of men, rose upon the
   Boeotians over Lake Cephisus; or whether it were the Idæan Curetes, a
   divine race; or the Phrygian Corybantes, whom first the sun beheld
   springing up after the manner of the growth of trees; or whether
   Arcadia brought forth Pelasgus, of greater antiquity than the moon; or
   Eleusis (produced) Diaulus, an inhabitant of Raria; or Lemnus begot
   Cabirus, fair child of secret orgies; or Pallene (brought forth) the
   Phlegræan Alcyoneus, oldest of the giants. But the Libyans affirm that
   Iarbas, first born, on emerging from arid plains, commenced eating the
   sweet acorn of Jupiter. But the Nile of the Egyptians," he says, "up to
   this day fertilizing mud, (and therefore) generating animals, renders
   up living bodies, which acquire flesh from moist vapour." The
   Assyrians, however, say that fish-eating Oannes [331] was (the first
   man, and) produced among themselves. The Chaldeans, however, say that
   this Adam is the man whom alone earth brought forth. And that he lay
   inanimate, unmoved, (and) still as a statue; being an image of him who
   is above, who is celebrated as the man Adam, [332] having been begotten
   by many powers, concerning whom individually is an enlarged discussion.

   In order, therefore, that finally the Great Man from above may be
   overpowered, "from whom," as they say, "the whole family named on earth
   and in the heavens has been formed, to him was given also a soul, that
   through the soul he might suffer; and that the enslaved image may be
   punished of the Great and most Glorious and Perfect Man, for even so
   they call him. Again, then, they ask what is the soul, and whence, and
   what kind in its nature, that, coming to the man and moving him, [333]
   it should enslave and punish the image of the Perfect Man. They do not,
   however, (on this point) institute an inquiry from the Scriptures, but
   ask this (question) also from the mystic (rites). And they affirm that
   the soul is very difficult to discover, and hard to understand; for it
   does not remain in the same figure or the same form invariably, or in
   one passive condition, that either one could express it by a sign, or
   comprehend it substantially.

   But they have these varied changes (of the soul) set down in the gospel
   inscribed "according to the Egyptians." [334] They are, then, in doubt,
   as all the rest of men among the Gentiles, whether (the soul) is at all
   from something pre-existent, or whether from the self-produced (one),
   [335] or from a widespread Chaos. And first they fly for refuge to the
   mysteries of the Assyrians, perceiving the threefold division of the
   man; for the Assyrians first advanced the opinion that the soul has
   three parts, and yet (is essentially) one. For of soul, say they, is
   every nature desirous, and each in a different manner. For soul is
   cause of all things made; all things that are nourished, (the Naassene)
   says, and that grow, require soul. For it is not possible, he says, to
   obtain any nourishment or growth where soul is not present. For even
   stones, he affirms, are animated, for they possess what is capable of
   increase; but increase would not at any time take place without
   nourishment, for it is by accession that things which are being
   increased grow, but accession is the nourishment of things that are
   nurtured. Every nature, then, (the Naasene) says, of things celestial,
   and earthly, and infernal, desires a soul.  And an entity of this
   description the Assyrians call Adonis or Endymion; [336] and when it is
   styled Adonis, Venus, he says, loves and desires the soul when styled
   by such a name. But Venus is production, according to them.  But
   whenever Proserpine or Cora becomes enamoured with Adonis, there
   results, he says, a certain mortal soul separated from Venus (that is,
   from generation). But should the Moon pass into concupiscence for
   Endymion, and into love of her form, the nature, [337] he says, of the
   higher beings requires a soul likewise. But if, he says, the mother of
   the gods emasculate Attis, [338] and herself has this (person) as an
   object of affection, the blessed nature, he says, of the supernal and
   everlasting (beings) alone recalls the male power of the soul to
   itself.

   For (the Naassene) says, there is the hermaphrodite man. According to
   this account of theirs, the intercourse of woman with man is
   demonstrated, in conformity with such teaching, to be an exceedingly
   wicked and filthy (practice). [339] For, says (the Naassene), Attis has
   been emasculated, that is, he has passed over from the earthly parts of
   the nether world to the everlasting substance above, where, he says,
   there is neither female or male, [340] but a new creature, [341] a new
   man, which is hermaphrodite.  As to where, however, they use the
   expression "above," I shall show when I come to the proper place (for
   treating this subject). But they assert that, by their account, they
   testify that Rhea is not absolutely isolated, but--for so I may
   say--the universal creature; and this they declare to be what is
   affirmed by the Word. "For the invisible things of Him are seen from
   the creation of the world, being understood by the things that are made
   by Him, even His eternal power and Godhead, for the purpose of leaving
   them without excuse. Wherefore, knowing God, they glorified Him not as
   God, nor gave Him thanks; but their foolish heart was rendered vain.
   For, professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed
   the glory of the uncorruptible God into images of the likeness of
   corruptible man, and of birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
   things. Wherefore also God gave them up unto vile affections; for even
   their women did change the natural use into that which is against
   nature." What, however, the natural use is, according to them, we shall
   afterwards declare. "And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use
   of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men
   working that which is unseemly"--now the expression that which is
   unseemly signifies, according to these (Naasseni), the first and
   blessed substance, figureless, the cause of all figures to those things
   that are moulded into shapes,--"and receiving in themselves that
   recompense of their error which was meet." [342] For in these words
   which Paul has spoken they say the entire secret of theirs, and a
   hidden mystery of blessed pleasure, are comprised. For the promise of
   washing is not any other, according to them, than the introduction of
   him that is washed in, according to them, life-giving water, and
   anointed with ineffable [343] ointment (than his introduction) into
   unfading bliss.

   But they assert that not only is there in favour of their doctrine,
   testimony to be drawn from the mysteries of the Assyrians, but also
   from those of the Phrygians concerning the happy nature--concealed, and
   yet at the same time disclosed--of things that have been, and are
   coming into existence, and moreover will be,--(a happy nature) which,
   (the Naassene) says, is the kingdom of heaven to be sought for within a
   man. [344] And concerning this (nature) they hand down an explicit
   passage, occurring [345] in the Gospel inscribed according to Thomas,
   [346] expressing themselves thus: "He who seeks me, will find me in
   children from seven years old; for there concealed, I shall in the
   fourteenth age be made manifest." This, however, is not (the teaching)
   of Christ, but of Hippocrates, who uses these words: "A child of seven
   years is half of a father." And so it is that these (heretics), placing
   the originative nature of the universe in causative seed, (and) having
   ascertained the (aphorism) of Hippocrates, [347] that a child of seven
   years old is half of a father, say that in fourteen years, according to
   Thomas, he is manifested. This, with them, is the ineffable and
   mystical Logos. They assert, then, that the Egyptians, who after the
   Phrygians, [348] it is established, are of greater antiquity than all
   mankind, and who confessedly were the first to proclaim to all the rest
   of men the rites and orgies of, at the same time, all the gods, as well
   as the species and energies (of things), have the sacred and august,
   and for those who are not initiated, unspeakable mysteries of Isis.
   These, however, are not anything else than what by her of the seven
   dresses and sable robe was sought and snatched away, namely, the
   pudendum of Osiris. And they say that Osiris is water. [349] But the
   seven-robed nature, encircled and arrayed with seven mantles of
   ethereal texture--for so they call the planetary stars, allegorizing
   and denominating them ethereal [350] robes,--is as it were the
   changeable generation, and is exhibited as the creature transformed by
   the ineffable and unportrayable, [351] and inconceivable and figureless
   one.  And this, (the Naassene) says, is what is declared in Scripture,
   "The just will fall seven times, and rise again." [352] For these
   falls, he says, are the changes of the stars, moved by Him who puts all
   things in motion.

   They affirm, then, concerning the substance [353] of the seed which is
   a cause of all existent things, that it is none of these, but that it
   produces and forms all things that are made, expressing themselves
   thus: "I become what I wish, and I am what I am: on account of this I
   say, that what puts all things in motion is itself unmoved. For what
   exists remains forming all things, and nought of existing things is
   made." [354] He says that this (one) alone is good, and that what is
   spoken by the Saviour [355] is declared concerning this (one):  "Why do
   you say that am good? One is good, my Father which is in the heavens,
   who causeth His sun to rise upon the just and unjust, and sendeth rain
   upon saints and sinners." [356] But who the saintly ones are on whom He
   sends the rain, and the sinners on whom the same sends the rain, this
   likewise we shall afterwards declare with the rest. And this is the
   great and secret and unknown mystery of the universe, concealed and
   revealed among the Egyptians. For Osiris, [357] (the Naassene) says, is
   in temples in front of Isis; [358] and his pudendum stands exposed,
   looking downwards, and crowned with all its own fruits of things that
   are made. And (he affirms) that such stands not only in the most
   hallowed temples chief of idols, but that also, for the information of
   all, it is as it were a light not set under a bushel, but upon a
   candlestick, proclaiming its message upon the housetops, [359] in all
   byways, and all streets, and near the actual dwellings, placed in front
   as a certain appointed limit and termination of the dwelling, and that
   this is denominated the good (entity) by all. For they style this
   good-producing, not knowing what they say. And the Greeks, deriving
   this mystical (expression) from the Egyptians, preserve it until this
   day. For we behold, says (the Naassene), statues of Mercury, of such a
   figure honoured among them.

   Worshipping, however, Cyllenius with especial distinction, they style
   him Logios. For Mercury is Logos, who being interpreter and fabricator
   of the things that have been made simultaneously, and that are being
   produced, and that will exist, stands honoured among them, fashioned
   into some such figure as is the pudendum of a man, having an impulsive
   power from the parts below towards those above. And that this
   (deity)--that is, a Mercury of this description--is, (the Naassene)
   says, a conjurer of the dead, and a guide of departed spirits, and an
   originator of souls; nor does this escape the notice of the poets, who
   express themselves thus:--

   "Cyllenian Hermes also called

   The souls of mortal suitors." [360]

   Not Penelope's suitors, says he, O wretches! but (souls) awakened and
   brought to recollection of themselves,

   "From honour so great, and from bliss so long." [361]

   That is, from the blessed man from above, or the primal man or Adam, as
   it seems to them, souls have been conveyed down here into a creation of
   clay, that they may serve the Demiurge of this creation, Ialdabaoth,
   [362] a fiery God, a fourth number; for so they call the Demiurge and
   father of the formal world:--

   "And in hand he held a lovely

   Wand of gold that human eyes enchants,

   Of whom he will, and those again who slumber rouses." [363]

   This, he says, is he who alone has power of life and death. Concerning
   this, he says, it has been written, "Thou shalt rule them with a rod of
   iron." [364] The poet, however, he says, being desirous of adorning the
   incomprehensible (potency) of the blessed nature of the Logos, invested
   him with not an iron, but golden wand. And he enchants the eyes of the
   dead, as he says, and raises up again those that are slumbering, after
   having been roused from sleep, and after having been suitors. And
   concerning these, he says, the Scripture speaks: "Awake thou that
   sleepest, and arise, and Christ will give thee light." [365]

   This is the Christ who, he says, in all that have been generated, is
   the portrayed Son of Man from the unportrayable Logos. This, he says,
   is the great and unspeakable mystery of the Eleusinian rites, Hye, Cye.
   [366] And he affirms that all things have been subjected unto him, and
   this is that which has been spoken, "Their sound is gone forth unto all
   the earth," [367] just as it agrees with the expressions, "Mercury
   [368] waving his wand, guides the souls, but they twittering follow."
   I mean the disembodied spirits follow continuously in such a way as the
   poet by his imagery delineates, using these words:--

   "And as when in the magic cave's recess

   Bats humming fly, and when one drops

   From ridge of rock, and each to other closely clings." [369]

   The expression "rock," he says, he uses of Adam. This, he affirms, is
   Adam: "The chief corner-stone become the head of the corner." [370] For
   that in the head the substance is the formative brain from which the
   entire family is fashioned. [371]   "Whom," he says, "I place as a rock
   at the foundations of Zion." Allegorizing, he says, he speaks of the
   creation of the man. The rock is interposed (within) the teeth, as
   Homer [372] says, "enclosure of teeth," that is, a wall and fortress,
   in which exists the inner man, who thither has fallen from Adam, the
   primal man above. And he has been "severed without hands to effect the
   division," [373] and has been borne down into the image of oblivion,
   being earthly and clayish. And he asserts that the twittering spirits
   follow him, that is, the Logos:--

   "Thus these, twittering, came together; and then the souls

   That is, he guides them;

   Gentle Hermes led through wide-extended paths." [374]

   That is, he says, into the eternal places separated from all
   wickedness. For whither, he says, did they come:--

   "O'er ocean's streams they came, and Leuca's cliff,

   And by the portals of the sun and land of dreams."

   This, he says, is ocean, "generation of gods and generation of men"
   [375] ever whirled round by the eddies of water, at one time upwards,
   at another time downwards. But he says there ensues a generation of men
   when the ocean flows downwards; but when upwards to the wall and
   fortress and the cliff of Luecas, a generation of gods takes place.
   This, he asserts, is that which has been written: "I said, Ye are gods,
   and all children of the highest;" [376] "If ye hasten to fly out of
   Egypt, and repair beyond the Red Sea into the wilderness," that is,
   from earthly intercourse to the Jerusalem above, which is the mother of
   the living; [377] "If, moreover, again you return into Egypt," that is,
   into earthly intercourse, [378] "ye shall die as men." For mortal, he
   says, is every generation below, but immortal that which is begotten
   above, for it is born of water only, and of spirit, being spiritual,
   not carnal. But what (is born) below is carnal, that is, he says, what
   is written.  "That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which
   is born of the spirit is spirit." [379] This, according to them, is the
   spiritual generation. This, he says, is the great Jordan [380] which,
   flowing on (here) below, and preventing the children of Israel from
   departing out of Egypt--I mean from terrestrial intercourse, for Egypt
   is with them the body,--Jesus drove back, and made it flow upwards.
     

   [326] The Abbe Cruice observes that we have here another proof that the
   Philosophumena is not the work of Origen, who in his Contra Celsum
   mentions Mariamne, but professes not to have met with any of his
   followers (see Contr. Cels., lib. v. p. 272, ed. Spenc.). This confirms
   the opinion mostly entertained of Origen, that neither the bent of his
   mind nor the direction of his studies justify the supposition that he
   would write a detailed history of heresy.

   [327] Isa. liii. 8.

   [328] Or adiaphoron, equivocal.

   [329] This has been by the best critics regarded as a fragment of a
   hymn of Pindar's on Jupiter Ammon. Schneidewin furnishes a restored
   poetic version of it by Bergk. This hymn, we believe, first suggested
   to M. Miller an idea of the possible value and importance of the ms. of
   The Refutation brought by Minöides Mynas from Greece.

   [330] The usual form is Alalcomenes. He was a Boeoian Autocthon.

   [331] Or, "Iannes." The Abbe Cruice refers to Berosus, Chald. Hist.,
   pp. 48, 49, and to his own dissertation (Paris, 1844) on the authority
   to be attached to Josephus, as regards the writers adduced by him in
   his treatise Contr. Apion.

   [332] The Rabbins, probably deriving their notions from the Chaldeans,
   entertained the most exaggerated ideas respecting the perfection of
   Adam. Thus Gerson, in his Commentary on Abarbanel, says that "Adam was
   endued with the very perfection of wisdom, and was chief of
   philosophers, that he was an immediate disciple of the Deity, also a
   physician and astrologer, and the originator of all the arts and
   sciences." This spirit of exaggeration passed from the Jews to the
   Christians (see Clementine Homilies, ii.). Aquinas (Sum. Theol., pars
   i. 94) says of Adam, "Since the first man was appointed perfect, he
   ought to have possessed a knowledge of everything capable of being
   ascertained by natural means."

   [333] Or, "vanquishing him" (Roeper).

   [334] This is known to us only by some ancient quotations. The Naasseni
   had another work of repute among them, the "Gospel according to
   Thomas." Bunsen conjectures that the two "Gospels" may be the same.

   [335] autogenous.  Miller has autou genous, which Bunsen rejects in
   favour of the reading "self-begotten."

   [336] Schneidewin considers that there have been left out in the ms.
   the words "or Attis" after Endymion. Attis is subsequently mentioned
   with some degree of particularity.

   [337] Or, "creation."

   [338] Or, "Apis." See Diodorus Siculus, iii. 58, 59. Pausanias, vii.
   20, writes the word Attes. See also Minucius Felix, Octav., cap. xxi.

   [339] Or, "forbidden."

   [340] Gal. iii. 28, and Clement's Epist. ad Rom., ii. 12. [This is the
   apocryphal Clement reserved for vol. viii. of this series. See also
   same text, Ignatius, vol. i. p. 81.]

   [341] See 2 Cor. v. 17; Gal. vi 15.

   [342] Rom. i. 20-27.

   [343] alalo; some read allo.

   [344] Luke xvii. 21.

   [345] These words do not occur in the "Gospel of Thomas concerning the
   Saviour's infancy," as given by Fabricius and Thilo.

   [346] The Abbe Cruice mentions the following works as of authority
   among the Naasseni, and from whence they derived their system:  The
   Gospel of Perfection, Gospel of Eve, The Questions of Mary, Concerning
   the Offspring of Mary, The Gospel of Philip, The Gospel according to
   (1) Thomas, (2) the Egyptians.  (See Epiphanius, Hæres., c. xxvi., and
   Origen, Contr. Cels., vi. 30, p. 296, ed. Spenc.) These heretics
   likewise make use of the Old Testament, St. John's Gospel, and some of
   the Pauline epistles.

   [347] Miller refers to Littré, Traduct. des OEuvres d'Hippocrate, t. i.
   p. 396.

   [348] See Herodotus, ii. 2, 5.

   [349] See Origen, Contr. Cels., v. 38 (p. 257, ed. Spenc.).

   [350] Or, "brilliant."

   [351] Or, "untraceable."

   [352] Prov. xxiv. 16; Luke xvii. 4.

   [353] Or, "spirit."

   [354] See Epiphanius, Hæres., xxvi. 8.

   [355] Matt. xix. 17; Mark x. 18; Luke xviii. 19.

   [356] Matt. v. 45.

   [357] Miller has oudeis. See Plutarch, De Isid. et Osirid., c. li. p.
   371.

   [358] Or, eisodou, i.e., entrance.

   [359] Matt. v. 15; x. 27.

   [360] Odyssey, xxiv. 1.

   [361] Empedocles, v. 390, Stein.

   [362] Esaldaius, Miller (see Origen, Const. Cels., v. 76, p. 297, ed.
   Spenc.).

   [363] Odyssey, xxiv. 2.

   [364] Ps. ii. 9.

   [365] Eph. v. 14.

   [366] See Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, c. xxxiv.

   [367] Rom. x. 18.

   [368] Odyssey, xxiv. 5.

   [369] Ibid., xxiv. 6 et seq.

   [370] Ps. cxviii. 22; Isa. xxviii. 16.

   [371] Eph. iii. 15.

   [372] Iliad, iv. 350, herkos odonton:-- "What word hath 'scaped the
   ivory guard that should Have fenced it in."

   [373] Dan. ii. 45.

   [374] Odyssey, xxiv. 9.

   [375] Iliad, v. 246, xxiv. 201.

   [376] Ps. lxxxii. 6; Luke vi. 35; John x. 34.

   [377] Gal. iv. 26.

   [378] Philo Judæus adopts the same imagery (see his De Agricult., lib.
   i.).

   [379] John iii. 6.

   [380] Josh. iii. 7-17.
     

   Chapter III.--Further Exposition of the Heresy of the Naasseni; Profess
   to Follow Homer; Acknowledge a Triad of Principles; Their Technical
   Names of the Triad; Support These on the Authority of Greek Poets;
   Allegorize Our Saviour's Miracles; The Mystery of the Samothracians;
   Why the Lord Chose Twelve Disciples; The Name Corybas, Used by
   Thracians and Phrygians, Explained; Naasseni Profess to Find Their
   System in Scripture; Their Interpretation of Jacob's Vision; Their Idea
   of the "Perfect Man;" The "Perfect Man" Called "Papa" By the Phrygians;
   The Naasseni and Phrygians on the Resurrection; The Ecstasis of St.
   Paul; The Mysteries of Religion as Alluded to by Christ; Interpretation
   of the Parable of the Sower; Allegory of the Promised Land; Comparison
   of the System of the Phrygians with the Statements of Scripture;
   Exposition of the Meaning of the Higher and Lower Eleusinian Mysteries;
   The Incarnation Discoverable Here According to the Naasseni.

   Adopting these and such like (opinions), these most marvellous
   Gnostics, inventors of a novel [381] grammatical art, magnify Homer as
   their prophet--as one, (according to them,) who, after the mode adopted
   in the mysteries, announces these truths; and they mock those who are
   not indoctrinated into the holy Scriptures, by betraying them into such
   notions. They make, however, the following assertion: he who says that
   all things derive consistence from one, is in error; but he who says
   that they are of three, is in possession of the truth, and will furnish
   a solution of the (phenomena of the) universe. For there is, says (the
   Naassene), one blessed nature of the Blessed Man, of him who is above,
   (namely) Adam; and there is one mortal nature, that which is below; and
   there is one kingless generation, which is begotten above, where, he
   says, is Mariam [382] the sought-for one, and Iothor the mighty sage,
   and Sephora the gazing one, and Moses whose generation is not in Egypt,
   for children were born unto him in Madian; and not even this, he says,
   has escaped the notice of the poets.

   "Threefold was our partition; each obtained

   His meed of honour due." [383]

   For, says he, it is necessary that the magnitudes be declared, and that
   they thus be declared by all everywhere, "in order that hearing they
   may not hear, and seeing they may not see." [384] For if, he says, the
   magnitudes were not declared, the world could not have obtained
   consistence.  These are the three tumid expressions (of these
   heretics), Caulacau, [385] Saulasau, Zeesar, i.e., Adam, who is
   farthest above; Saulasau, that is, the mortal one below; Zeesar, that
   is, Jordan that flows upwards. This, he says, is the hermaphrodite man
   (present) in all. But those who are ignorant of him, call him Geryon
   with the threefold body--Geryon, i.e., as if (in the sense of) flowing
   from earth--but (whom) the Greeks by common consent (style) "celestial
   horn of the moon," because he mixed and blended all things in all. "For
   all things," he says, "were made by him, and not even one thing was
   made without him, and what was made in him is life." [386] This, says
   he, is the life, the ineffable generation of perfect men, which was not
   known by preceding generations. But the passage, "nothing was made
   without him," refers to the formal world, for it was created without
   his instrumentality by the third and fourth (of the quaternion named
   above). For says he, this is the cup "Condy, out of which the king,
   while he quaffs, draws his omens." [387] This, he says, has been
   discovered hid in the beauteous seeds of Benjamin.  And the Greeks
   likewise, he says, speak of this in the following terms:--

   "Water to the raging mouth bring; thou slave, bring wine;

   Intoxicate and plunge me into stupor.

   My tankard tells me

   The sort I must become." [388]

   This, says he, was alone sufficient for its being understood by men; (I
   mean) the cup of Anacreon declaring, (albeit) mutely, an ineffable
   mystery. For dumb, says he, is Anacreon's cup; and (yet) Anacreon
   affirms that it speaks to himself, in language mute, as to what sort he
   must become--that is spiritual, not carnal--if he shall listen in
   silence to the concealed mystery. And this is the water in those fair
   nuptials which Jesus changing made into wine. This, he says, is the
   mighty and true beginning of miracles [389] which Jesus performed in
   Cana of Galilee, and (thus) manifested the kingdom of heaven. This,
   says he, is the kingdom of heaven that reposes within us as a treasure,
   as leaven hid in the three measures of meal. [390]

   This is, he says, the great and ineffable mystery of the Samothracians,
   which it is allowable, he says, for us only who are initiated to know.
   For the Samothracians expressly hand down, in the mysteries that are
   celebrated among them, that (same) Adam as the primal man. And
   habitually there stand in the temple of the Samothracians two images of
   naked men, having both hands stretched aloft towards heaven, and their
   pudenda erecta, as with the statue of Mercury on Mount Cyllene. And the
   aforesaid images are figures of the primal man, and of that spiritual
   one that is born again, in every respect of the same substance with
   that man.  This, he says, is what is spoken by the Saviour: "If ye do
   not drink my blood, and eat my flesh, ye will not enter into the
   kingdom of heaven; but even though," He says, "ye drink of the cup
   which I drink of, whither I go, ye cannot enter there." [391] For He
   says He was aware of what sort of nature each of His disciples was, and
   that there was a necessity that each of them should attain unto His own
   peculiar nature. For He says He chose twelve disciples from the twelve
   tribes, and spoke by them to each tribe. On this account, He says, the
   preachings of the twelve disciples neither did all hear, nor, if they
   heard, could they receive. For the things that are not according to
   nature, are with them contrary to nature.

   This, he says, the Thracians who dwell around Hæmus, and the Phrygians
   similarly with the Thracians, denominate Corybas, because, (though)
   deriving the beginning of his descent from the head above and from the
   unportrayed brain, and (though) permeating all the principles of the
   existing state of things, (yet) we do not perceive how and in what
   manner he comes down. This, says he, is what is spoken: "We have heard
   his voice, no doubt, but we have not seen his shape." [392] For the
   voice of him that is set apart [393] and portrayed is heard; but (his)
   shape, which descends from above from the unportrayed one,--what sort
   it is, nobody knows. It resides, however, in an earthly mould, yet no
   one recognises it. This, he says, is "the god that inhabiteth the
   flood," according to the Psalter, "and who speaketh and crieth from
   many waters." [394] The "many waters," he says, are the diversified
   generation of mortal men, from which (generation) he cries and
   vociferates to the unportrayed man, saying, "Preserve my only-begotten
   from the lions." [395] In reply to him, it has, says he, been declared,
   "Israel, thou art my child: fear not; even though thou passest through
   rivers, they shall not drown thee; even though thou passest through
   fire, it shall not scorch thee." [396] By rivers he means, says he, the
   moist substance of generation, and by fire the impulsive principle and
   desire for generation. "Thou art mine; fear not." And again, he says,
   "If a mother forget her children, so as not to have pity on them and
   give them food, I also will forget you." [397] Adam, he says, speaks to
   his own men: "But even though a woman forget these things, yet I will
   not forget you. I have painted you on my hands."  In regard, however,
   of his ascension, that is his regeneration, that he may become
   spiritual, not carnal, the Scripture, he says, speaks (thus): "Open the
   gates, ye who are your rulers; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors,
   and the King of glory shall come in," that is a wonder of wonders.
   [398] "For who," he says, "is this King of glory? A worm, and not a
   man; a reproach of man, and an outcast of the people; himself is the
   King of glory, and powerful in war." [399]

   And by war he means the war that is in the body, because its frame has
   been made out of hostile elements; as it has been written, he says,
   "Remember the conflict that exists in the body." [400] Jacob, he says,
   saw this entrance and this gate in his journey into Mesopotamia, that
   is, when from a child he was now becoming a youth and a man; that is,
   (the entrance and gate) were made known unto him as he journeyed into
   Mesopotamia. But Mesopotamia, he says, is the current of the great
   ocean flowing from the midst of the Perfect Man; and he was astonished
   at the celestial gate, exclaiming, "How terrible is this place! it is
   nought else than the house of God, and this (is) the gate of heaven."
   [401] On account of this, he says, Jesus uses the words, "I am the true
   gate." [402] Now he who makes these statements is, he says, the Perfect
   Man that is imaged from the unportrayable one from above. The Perfect
   Man therefore cannot, he says, be saved, unless, entering in through
   this gate, he be born again. But this very one the Phrygians, he says,
   call also Papa, because he tranquillized all things which, prior to his
   manifestation, were confusedly and dissonantly moved. For the name, he
   says, of Papa belongs simultaneously to all creatures [403]
   --celestial, and terrestrial, and infernal--who exclaim, Cause to
   cease, cause to cease the discord of the world, and make "peace for
   those that are afar off," that is, for material and earthly beings; and
   "peace for those that are near," [404] that is, for perfect men that
   are spiritual and endued with reason. But the Phrygians denominate this
   same also "corpse"--buried in the body, as it were, in a mausoleum and
   tomb. This, he says, is what has been declared, "Ye are whited
   sepulchres, full," he says, "of dead men's bones within," [405] because
   there is not in you the living man. And again he exclaims, "The dead
   shall start forth from the graves," [406] that is, from the earthly
   bodies, being born again spiritual, not carnal. For this, he says, is
   the Resurrection that takes place through the gate of heaven, through
   which, he says, all those that do not enter remain dead. These same
   Phrygians, however, he says, affirm again that this very (man), as a
   consequence of the change, (becomes) a god.  For, he says, he becomes a
   god when, having risen from the dead, he will enter into heaven through
   a gate of this kind. Paul the apostle, he says, knew of this gate,
   partially opening it in a mystery, and stating "that he was caught up
   by an angel, and ascended as far as the second and third heaven into
   paradise itself; and that he beheld sights and heard unspeakable words
   which it would not be possible for man to declare." [407]

   These are, he says, what are by all called the secret mysteries, "which
   (also we speak), not in words taught of human wisdom, but in those
   taught of the Spirit, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But
   the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
   are foolishness unto him." [408] And these are, he says, the ineffable
   mysteries of the Spirit, which we alone are acquainted with. Concerning
   these, he says, the Saviour has declared, "No one can come unto me,
   except my heavenly Father draw some one unto me." [409] For it is very
   difficult, he says, to accept and receive this great and ineffable
   mystery. And again, it is said, the Saviour has declared, "Not every
   one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
   heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven."
   [410] And it is necessary that they who perform this (will), not hear
   it merely, should enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again, he says,
   the Saviour has declared, "The publicans and the harlots go into the
   kingdom of heaven before you." [411] For "the publicans," he says, are
   those who receive the revenues [412] of all things; [413] but we, he
   says, are the publicans, "unto whom the ends of the ages have come."
   [414] For "the ends," he says, are the seeds scattered from the
   unportrayable one upon the world, through which the whole cosmical
   system is completed; for through these also it began to exist.  And
   this, he says, is what has been declared: "The sower went forth to sow.
   And some fell by the wayside, and was trodden down; and some on the
   rocky places, and sprang up," he says, "and on account of its having no
   depth (of soil), it withered and died; and some," he says, "fell on
   fair and good ground, and brought forth fruit, some a hundred, some
   sixty, and some thirty fold. Who hath ears," he says, "to hear, let him
   hear." [415] The meaning of this, he says, is as follows, that none
   becomes a hearer of these mysteries, unless only the perfect Gnostics.
   This, he says, is the fair and good land which Moses speaks of: "I will
   bring you into a fair and good land, into a land flowing with milk and
   honey." [416] This, he says, is the honey and the milk, by tasting
   which those that are perfect become kingless, and share in the Pleroma.
   This, he says, is the Pleroma, through which all existent things that
   are produced [417] have from the ingenerable one been both produced and
   completed.

   And this same (one) is styled also by [418] the Phrygians "unfruitful."
   For he is unfruitful when he is carnal, and causes the desire of the
   flesh. This, he says, is what is spoken: "Every tree not producing good
   fruit, is cut down and cast into the fire." [419] For these fruits, he
   says, are only rational living men, who enter in through the third
   gate. They say, forsooth, "Ye devour the dead, and make the living;
   (but) if ye eat the living, what will ye do?" They assert, however,
   that the living "are rational faculties and minds, and men--pearls of
   that unportrayable one cast before the creature below." [420] This, he
   says, is what (Jesus) asserts: "Throw not that which is holy unto the
   dogs, nor pearls unto the swine." [421] Now they allege that the work
   of swine and dogs is the intercourse of the woman with a man. And the
   Phrygians, he says, call this very one "goat-herd" (Aipolis), not
   because, he says, he is accustomed to feed the goats female and male,
   as the natural (men) use the name, but because, he says, he is
   "Aipolis"--that is, always ranging over,--who both revolves and carries
   around the entire cosmical system by his revolutionary motion. For the
   word "Polein" signifies to turn and change things; whence, he says,
   they all call the twos centre of the heaven poles (Poloi).  And the
   poet says:--

   "What sea-born sinless sage comes hither,

   Undying Egyptian Proteus?" [422]

   He is not undone, [423] he says, [424] but revolves as it were, and
   goes round himself. Moreover, also, cities in which we dwell, because
   we turn and go round in them, are denominated "Poleis."  In this
   manner, he says, the Phrygians call this one "Aipolis," inasmuch as he
   everywhere ceaselessly turns all things, and changes them into their
   own peculiar (functions). And the Phrygians style him, he says, "very
   fruitful" likewise, "because," says he, "more numerous are the children
   of the desolate one, than those of her which hath an husband;" [425]
   that is, things by being born again become immortal and abide for ever
   in great numbers, even though the things that are produced may be few;
   whereas things carnal, he says, are all corruptible, even though very
   many things (of this type) are produced. For this reason, he says,
   "Rachel wept [426] for her children, and would not," says (the
   prophet), "be comforted; sorrowing for them, for she knew," says he,
   "that they are not." [427] But Jeremiah likewise utters lamentation for
   Jerusalem below, not the city in Phoenicia, but the corruptible
   generation below. For Jeremiah likewise, he says, was aware of the
   Perfect Man, of him that is born again--of water and the Spirit not
   carnal. At least Jeremiah himself remarked: "He is a man, and who shall
   know him?" [428] In this manner, (the Naassene) says, the knowledge of
   the Perfect Man is exceedingly profound, and difficult of
   comprehension. For, he says, the beginning of perfection is a knowledge
   of man, whereas knowledge of God is absolute perfection.

   The Phrygians, however, assert, he says, that he is likewise "a green
   ear of corn reaped." And after the Phrygians, the Athenians, while
   initiating people into the Eleusinian rites, likewise display to those
   who are being admitted to the highest grade at these mysteries, the
   mighty, and marvellous, and most perfect secret suitable for one
   initiated into the highest mystic truths: (I allude to) an ear of corn
   in silence reaped. But this ear of corn is also (considered) among the
   Athenians to constitute the perfect enormous illumination (that has
   descended) from the unportrayable one, just as the Hierophant himself
   (declares); not, indeed, emasculated like Attis, [429] but made a
   eunuch by means of hemlock, and despising [430] all carnal generation.
   (Now) by night in Eleusis, beneath a huge fire, (the Celebrant)
   enacting the great and secret mysteries, vociferates and cries aloud,
   saying, "August Brimo has brought forth a consecrated son, Brimus;"
   that is, a potent (mother has been delivered of) a potent child.  But
   revered, he says, is the generation that is spiritual, heavenly, from
   above, and potent is he that is so born. For the mystery is called
   "Eleusin" and "Anactorium."  "Eleusin," because, he says, we who are
   spiritual come flowing down from Adam above; for the word "eleusesthai"
   is, he says, of the same import with the expression "to come." But
   "Anactorium" is of the same import with the expression "to ascend
   upwards." This, he says, is what they affirm who have been initiated in
   the mysteries of the Eleusinians. It is, however, a regulation of law,
   that those who have been admitted into the lesser should again be
   initiated into the Great Mysteries. For greater destinies obtain
   greater portions. But the inferior mysteries, he says, are those of
   Proserpine below; in regard of which mysteries, and the path which
   leads thither, which is wide and spacious, and conducts those that are
   perishing to Proserpine, the poet likewise says:--

   "But under her a fearful path extends,

   Hollow, miry, yet best guide to

   Highly-honoured Aphrodite's lovely grove." [431]

   These, he says, are the inferior mysteries, those appertaining to
   carnal generation. Now, those men who are initiated into these inferior
   (mysteries) ought to pause, and (then) be admitted into the great (and)
   heavenly (ones). For they, he says, who obtain their shares (in this
   mystery), receive greater portions. For this, he says, is the gate of
   heaven; and this a house of God, where the Good Deity dwells alone. And
   into this (gate), he says, no unclean person shall enter, nor one that
   is natural or carnal; but it is reserved for the spiritual only. And
   those who come hither ought to cast off [432] their garments, and
   become all of them bridegrooms, emasculated through the virginal
   spirit. For this is the virgin [433] who carries in her womb and
   conceives and brings forth a son, not animal, not corporeal, but
   blessed for evermore. Concerning these, it is said, the Saviour has
   expressly declared that "straight and narrow is the way that leadeth
   unto life, and few there are that enter upon it; whereas broad and
   spacious is the way that leadeth unto destruction, and many there are
   that pass through it." [434]
     

   [381] Or, "empty."

   [382] The Abbe Cruice considers that this is taken from verses of
   Ezekiel, founding his opinion on fragments of these verses to be found
   in Eusebius' Præparat. Evang., ix. 38.

   [383] Iliad, xv. 189.

   [384] Matt. xiii. 13.

   [385] The commentators refer to Isa. xxviii. 10.  Epiphanius,Hæres.,
   xxv., mentions these expressions, but assigns them a different meaning.
    Saulasau is tribulation,Caulacau hope, and Zeesar "hope, as yet,
   little." [See my note on Irenæus, p. 350, this series, and see
   Elucidation II.]

   [386] John i. 3, 4.

   [387] Gen. xliv. 2-5.

   [388] Taken from Anacreon.

   [389] John ii. 1-11.

   [390] Matt. xiii. 33, 34; Luke xvii. 21.

   [391] John vi. 53; Mark x. 38.

   [392] John v. 37.

   [393] apotetagmenou:  some read apotetamenou.

   [394] Ps. xxix. 3, 10.

   [395] Ps. xxii. 20, 21; xxxv. 17.

   [396] Isa. xli. 8; xliii. 1, 2.

   [397] Isa. xlix. 15.

   [398] Ps. xxiv. 7-9.

   [399] Ps. xxii. 6; xxiv. 8.

   [400] This is a quotation from the Septuagint, Job xl. 27. The
   reference to the authorized (English) version would be xli. 8.

   [401] Gen. xxviii. 7, 17.

   [402] John x. 9; Matt. vii. 13.

   [403] [A strange amplifying of the word, which is now claimed
   exclusively for one. Elucidation III.]

   [404] Eph. ii. 17.

   [405] Matt. xxiii. 27.

   [406] Matt. xxvii. 52, 53.

   [407] 2 Cor. xii. 2.

   [408] 1 Cor. ii. 13, 14.

   [409] John vi. 44.

   [410] Matt. vii. 21.

   [411] Matt. xxi. 31.

   [412] The word translated "revenues" and "ends" is the same--tele

   [413] Ton holon: some read ton onion

   [414] 1 Cor. x. 11.

   [415] Matt. xiii. 3-9; Mark iv. 3-9; Luke viii. 5-8.

   [416] Deut. xxxi. 20.

   [417] Or, "genera."

   [418] upo: Miller reads apo

   [419] Matt. iii. 10; Luke iii. 9.

   [420] kato:  some read karpou

   [421] Matt. vii. 6.

   [422] Odyssey, iv. 384.

   [423] piprasketai; literally, bought and sold, i.e., ruined.

   [424] legei: some read amelei, i.e., doubtless, of course.

   [425] Isa. liv. 1; Gal. iv. 27.

   [426] eklaie: this is in the margin; elabe is in the ms. The marginal
   reading is the proper correction of that of the ms.

   [427] Jer. xxxi. 15; Matt. ii. 18.

   [428] Jer. xvii. 9.

   [429] [The Phrygian Atys (see cap. iv. infra), whose history should
   have saved Origen from an imitation of heathenism.]

   [430] paretemenos :  some read apertismenos, i.e., perfecting.

   [431] These verses have been ascribed to Parmenides.

   [432] Or, "receive."

   [433] Isa. vii. 14.

   [434] Matt. vii. 13, 14.
     

   Chapter IV.--Further Use Made of the System of the Phrygians; Mode of
   Celebrating the Mysteries; The Mystery of the "Great Mother;" These
   Mysteries Have a Joint Object of Worship with the Naasseni; The
   Naasseni Allegorize the Scriptural Account of the Garden of Eden; The
   Allegory Applied to the Life of Jesus.

   The Phrygians, however, further assert that the father of the universe
   is "Amygdalus," not a tree, he says, but that he is "Amygdalus" who
   previously existed; and he having in himself the perfect fruit, as it
   were, throbbing and moving in the depth, rent his breasts, and produced
   his now invisible, and nameless, and ineffable child, respecting whom
   we shall speak.  For the word "Amyxai" signifies, as it were, to burst
   and sever through, as he says (happens) in the case of inflamed bodies,
   and which have in themselves any tumour; and when doctors have cut
   this, they call it "Amychai." In this way, he says, the Phrygians call
   him "Amygdalus," from which proceeded and was born the Invisible (One),
   "by whom all things were made, and nothing was made without Him." [435]
   And the Phrygians say that what has been thence produced is "Syrictas"
   (piper), because the Spirit that is born is harmonious. "For God," he
   says, "is Spirit; wherefore," he affirms, "neither in this mountain do
   the true worshippers worship, nor in Jerusalem, but in spirit. For the
   adoration of the perfect ones," he says, "is spiritual, not carnal."
   [436] The Spirit, however, he says, is there where likewise the Father
   is named, and the Son is there born from this Father. This, he says, is
   the many-named, thousand-eyed Incomprehensible One, of whom every
   nature--each, however, differently--is desirous. This, he says, is the
   word of God, which, he says, is a word of revelation of the Great
   Power.  Wherefore it will be sealed, and hid, and concealed, lying in
   the habitation where lies the basis of the root of the universe, viz.
   Æons, Powers, Intelligences, Gods, Angels, delegated Spirits, Entities,
   Nonentities, Generables, Ingenerables, Incomprehensibles,
   Comprehensibles, Years, Months, Days, Hours, (and) Invisible Point from
   which [437] what is least begins to increase gradually. That which is,
   he says, nothing, and which consists of nothing, inasmuch as it is
   indivisible--(I mean) a point--will become through its own reflective
   power a certain incomprehensible magnitude. This, he says, is the
   kingdom of heaven, the grain of mustard seed, [438] the point which is
   indivisible in the body; and, he says, no one knows this (point) save
   the spiritual only. This, he says, is what has been spoken: "There is
   no speech nor language where their voice is not heard." [439]

   They rashly assume in this manner, that whatsoever things have been
   said and done by all men, (may be made to harmonize) with their own
   particular mental view, alleging that all things become spiritual.
   Whence likewise they assert, that those exhibiting themselves in
   theatres,--not even these say or do anything without premeditation.
   Therefore, he says, when, on the people assembling in the theatres, any
   one enters clad in a remarkable robe, carrying a harp and playing a
   tune (upon it, accompanying it) with a song of the great mysteries, he
   speaks as follows, not knowing what he says:  "Whether (thou art) the
   race of Saturn or happy Jupiter, [440] or mighty Rhea, Hail, Attis,
   gloomy mutilation of Rhea. Assyrians style thee thrice-longed-for
   Adonis, and the whole of Egypt (calls thee) Osiris, celestial horn of
   the moon; Greeks denominate (thee) Wisdom; Samothracians, venerable
   Adam; Hæmonians, Corybas; and them Phrygians (name thee) at one time
   Papa, at another time Corpse, or God, or Fruitless, or Aipolos, or
   green Ear of Corn that has been reaped, or whom the very fertile
   Amygdalus produced--a man, a musician." This, he says, is multiform
   Attis, whom while they celebrate in a hymn, they utter these words: "I
   will hymn Attis, son of Rhea, not with the buzzing sounds of trumpets,
   or of Idæan pipers, which accord with (the voices of) the Curetes; but
   I will mingle (my song) with Apollo's music of harps, evoe, evan,'
   inasmuch as thou art Pan, as thou art Bacchus, as thou art shepherd of
   brilliant stars."

   On account of these and such like reasons, these constantly attend the
   mysteries called those of the "Great Mother," supposing especially that
   they behold by means of the ceremonies performed there the entire
   mystery. For these have nothing more than the ceremonies that are
   performed there, except that they are not emasculated: they merely
   complete the work of the emasculated. For with the utmost severity and
   vigilance they enjoin (on their votaries) to abstain, as if they were
   emasculated, from intercourse with a woman. The rest, however, of the
   proceeding (observed in these mysteries), as we have declared at some
   length, (they follow) just as (if they were) emasculated persons.  And
   they do not worship any other object but Naas, (from thence) being
   styled Naasseni. But Naas is the serpent from whom, i.e., from the word
   Naas, (the Naassene) says, are all that under heaven are denominated
   temples (Naous). And (he states) that to him alone--that is, Naas--is
   dedicated every shrine and every initiatory rite, and every mystery;
   and, in general, that a religious ceremony could not be discovered
   under heaven, in which a temple (Naos) has no existence; and in the
   temple itself is Naas, from whom it has received its denomination of
   temple (Naos). And these affirm that the serpent is a moist substance,
   just as Thales also, the Milesian, (spoke of water as an originating
   principle,) and that nothing of existing things, immortal or mortal,
   animate or inanimate, could consist at all without him. And that all
   things are subject unto him, and that he is good, and that he has all
   things in himself, as in the horn of the one-horned bull; [441] so as
   that he imparts beauty and bloom to all things that exist according to
   their own nature and peculiarity, as if passing through all, just as
   ("the river) proceeding forth from Edem, and dividing itself into four
   heads." [442]

   They assert, however, that Edem is the brain, as it were, bound and
   tightly fastened in encircling robes, as if (in) heaven. But they
   suppose that man, as far as the head only, is Paradise, therefore that
   "this river, which proceeds out of Edem," that is, from the brain, "is
   divided into four heads, [443] and that the name of the first river is
   called Phison; this is that which encompasseth all the land of
   Havilath: there is gold, and the gold of that land is excellent, and
   there is bdellium and the onyx stone." This, he says, is the eye,
   which, by its honour (among the rest of the bodily organs), and its
   colours, furnishes testimony to what is spoken. "But the name of the
   second river is Gihon: this is that which compasseth the land of
   Ethiopia." This, he says, is hearing, since Gihon is (a tortuous
   stream), resembling a sort of labyrinth. "And the name of the third is
   Tigris. This is that which floweth over against (the country of) the
   Assyrians." This, he says, [444] is smelling, employing the exceedingly
   rapid current of the stream (as an analogy of this sense). But it flows
   over against (the country of) the Assyrians, because in every act of
   respiration following upon expiration, the breath drawn in from the
   external atmosphere enters with swifter motion and greater force. For
   this, he says, is the nature of respiration. "But the fourth river is
   Euphrates." This, they assert, is the mouth, through which are the
   passage outwards of prayer, and the passage inwards of nourishment.
   (The mouth) makes glad, and nurtures and fashions the Spiritual Perfect
   Man. This, he says, is "the water that is above the firmament," [445]
   concerning which, he says, the Saviour has declared, "If thou knewest
   who it is that asks, thou wouldst have asked from Him, and He would
   have given you to drink living, bubbling water." [446] Into this water,
   he says, every nature enters, choosing its own substances; and its
   peculiar quality comes to each nature from this water, he says, more
   than iron does to the magnet, and the gold to the backbone [447] of the
   sea falcon, and the chaff to the amber.

   But if any one, he says, is blind from birth, and has never beheld the
   true light, "which lighteneth every man that cometh into the world,"
   [448] by us let him recover his sight, and behold, as it were, through
   some paradise planted with every description of tree, and supplied with
   abundance of fruits, water coursing its way through all the trees and
   fruits; and he will see that from one and the same water the olive
   chooses for itself and draws the oil, and the vine the wine; and (so is
   it with) the rest of plants, according to each genus. That Man,
   however, he says, is of no reputation in the world, but of illustrious
   fame in heaven, being betrayed by those who are ignorant (of his
   perfections) to those who know him not, being accounted as a drop from
   a cask. [449] We, however, he says, are spiritual, who, from the
   life-giving water of Euphrates, which flows through the midst of
   Babylon, choose our own peculiar quality as we pass through the true
   gate, which is the blessed Jesus. And of all men, we Christians alone
   are those who in the third gate celebrate the mystery, and are anointed
   there with the unspeakable chrism from a horn, as David (was anointed),
   not from an earthen vessel, [450] he says, as (was) Saul, who held
   converse with the evil demon [451] of carnal concupiscence.
     

   [435] John i. 3.

   [436] John iv. 21.

   [437] ex hes or hexes, i.e., next.

   [438] Matt. xiii. 31, 32; Mark iv. 31, 32; Luke xiii. 19.

   [439] Ps. xix. 3.

   [440] The passage following obviously was in verse originally. It has
   been restored to its poetic form by Schneidewin.

   [441] Deut. xxxiii. 17.

   [442] Gen. ii. 10.

   [443] Gen. ii. 11-14.

   [444] Or, "they say."

   [445] Gen. i. 7.

   [446] John iv. 10.

   [447] kerkis. This word literally means the rod; or, in later times,
   the comb fixed into the histos (i.e., the upright loom), for the
   purpose of driving the threads of the woof home, thus making the web
   even and close. It is, among other significations, applied to bones in
   the leg or arm. Cruice and Schneidewin translate kerkis by spina, a
   rendering adopted above. The allusion is made again in chap. xii. and
   chap. xvi. In the last passage, kentron (spur) is used instead of
   kerkis

   [448] John i. 9; ix. 1.

   [449] Isa. xl. 15.

   [450] 1 Sam. x. 1; xvi. 13.

   [451] 1 Sam. xvi. 14.
     

   Chapter V.--Explanation of the System of the Naasseni Taken from One of
   Their Hymns.

   The foregoing remarks, then, though few out of many, we have thought
   proper to bring forward. For innumerable are the silly and crazy
   attempts of folly. But since, to the best of our ability, we have
   explained the unknown Gnosis, it seemed expedient likewise to adduce
   the following point. This psalm of theirs has been composed, by which
   they seem to celebrate all the mysteries of the error (advanced by)
   them in a hymn, couched in the following terms:--

   The world's producing law was Primal Mind, [452]

   And next was First-born's outpoured Chaos;

   And third, the soul received its law of toil:

   Encircl'd, therefore, with an aqueous [453] form,

   With care o'erpowered it succumbs to death.

   Now holding sway, it eyes the light,

   And now it weeps on misery flung;

   Now it mourns, now it thrills with joy;

   Now it wails, now it hears its doom;

   Now it hears its doom, now it dies,

   And now it leaves us, never to return.

   It, hapless straying, treads the maze of ills.

   But Jesus said, Father, behold,

   A strife of ills across the earth

   Wanders from thy breath (of wrath);

   But bitter Chaos (man) seeks to shun,

   And knows not how to pass it through.

   On this account, O Father, send me;

   Bearing seals, I shall descend;

   Through ages whole I'll sweep,

   All mysteries I'll unravel,

   And forms of Gods I'll show;

   And secrets of the saintly path,

   Styled "Gnosis," I'll impart.
     

   [452] The text of this hymn is very corrupt. The Abbe Cruice explains
   the connection of the hymn with the foregoing exposition, and considers
   it to have a reference to the Metempsychosis, which forms part of the
   system of the Naasseni. [Bunsen, i. 36.]

   [453] Or, "nimble."
     

   Chapter VI.--The Ophites the Grand Source of Heresy.

   These doctrines, then, the Naasseni attempt to establish, calling
   themselves Gnostics. But since the error is many-headed and
   diversified, resembling, in truth, the hydra that we read of in
   history; when, at one blow, we have struck off the heads of this
   (delusion) by means of refutation, employing the wand of truth, we
   shall entirely exterminate the monster. For neither do the remaining
   heresies present much difference of aspect from this, having a mutual
   connection through (the same) spirit of error. But since, altering the
   words and the names of the serpent, they wish that there should be many
   heads of the serpent, neither thus shall we fail thoroughly to refute
   them as they desire.
     

   Chapter VII.--The System of the Peratæ; Their Tritheism; Explanation of
   the Incarnation.

   There is also unquestionably a certain other (head of the hydra, [454]
   namely, the heresy) of the Peratæ, [455] whose blasphemy against Christ
   has for many years escaped notice. And the present is a fitting
   opportunity for bringing to light the secret mysteries of such
   (heretics). These allege that the world is one, triply divided. And of
   the triple division with them, one portion is a certain single
   originating principle, just as it were a huge fountain, which can be
   divided mentally into infinite segments. Now the first segment, and
   that which, according to them, is (a segment) in preference (to
   others), [456] is a triad, and it is called a Perfect Good, (and) a
   Paternal Magnitude. And the second portion of the triad of these is, as
   it were, a certain infinite crowd of potentialities that are generated
   [457] from themselves, (while) the third is formal. [458] And the
   first, which is good, is unbegotten, and the second is a self-producing
   good, and the third is created; and hence it is that they expressly
   declare that there are three Gods, three Logoi, three Minds, three Men.
   For to each portion of the world, after the division has been made,
   they assign both Gods, and Logoi, and Minds, and Men, and the rest; but
   that from unorigination and the first segment [459] of the world, when
   afterwards the world had attained unto its completion, there came down
   from above, for causes that we shall afterwards declare, in the time of
   Herod a certain man called Christ, with a threefold nature, and a
   threefold body, and a threefold power, (and) having in himself all
   (species of) concretions and potentialities (derivable) from the three
   divisions of the world; and that this, says (the Peratic), is what is
   spoken: "It pleased him that in him should dwell all fulness bodily,"
   [460] and in Him the entire Divinity resides of the triad as thus
   divided. For, he says, that from the two superjacent worlds--namely,
   from that (portion of the triad) which is unbegotten, and from that
   which is self-producing--there have been conveyed down into this world
   in which we are, seeds of all sorts of potentialities. What, however,
   the mode of the descent is, we shall afterwards declare.

   (The Peratic) then says that Christ descended from above from
   unorigination, that by His descent all things triply divided might be
   saved. For some things, he says, being borne down from above, will
   ascend through Him, whereas whatever (beings) form plots against those
   which are carried down from above are cast off, [461] and being placed
   in a state of punishment, are renounced. This, he says, is what is
   spoken: "For the Son of man came not into the world to destroy the
   world, but that the world through Him might be saved." The world, he
   says, he denominates those two parts that are situated above, viz.,
   both the unbegotten (portion of the triad), and the self-produced one.
   And when Scripture, he says, uses the words, "that we may not be
   condemned with the world," it alludes to the third portion of (the
   triad, that is) the formal world. For the third portion, which he
   styles the world (in which we are), must perish; but the two (remaining
   portions), which are situated above, must be rescued from corruption.
     

   [454] Something is wanting after Peratike in the text. Miller supplies
   the deficiency, and his conjecture is adopted above. Literally, it
   should be rendered--"the Peratic heresy, the blasphemy of which
   (heretics)," etc.

   [455] Most of what is mentioned by Hippolytus concerning this sect is
   new, as the chief writers on the early heresies are comparatively
   silent concerning the Peratæ; indeed, Irenæus, Tertullian, and
   Epiphanius completely so. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., vii.; (vol. ii.
   p. 555), mentions the Peratics, and Theodoret more fully than the rest
   speaks of them (Hæret. fabul., i. 17).  Theodoret, however, as the Abbe
   Cruice thinks, has appropriated his remarks from Hippolytus.

   [456] proechestera or prosechestera, contiguous. This is Miller's
   reading, but is devoid of sense. Proechestera, adopted by Schneidewin
   and Cruice, might bear the meaning of the expression par excellence.

   [457] gegennemenon:  Miller reads gegennemenon, agreeing with plethos.
   Bernays, in his Epistola Critica addressed to Bunsen, proposes the
   former reading.

   [458] eidikou: some read idikou. This term, adopted from the Platonic
   philosophy, is translated specialis by logicians, and transcendentalis
   by metaphysicians. It expresses the pre-existent form in the divine
   mind, according to which material objects were fashioned. The term
   seems out of place as used by the Peratics to denominate a corruptible
   and perishing world. We should rather expect ulikou, i.e., material.
   (See Aristotle's masterly exposition of the subject of the eidos and
   hule in his Metaphysics book vi., and p. 64 of the analysis prefixed to
   the translation in Bohn's Library.)

   [459] protes or pro tes, "antecedent to the segment."

   [460] somatikos, i.e., substantially. See Col. i. 19; ii. 9.

   [461] aphietai: some read aphiei, i.e., dismisses; some aphiei eike,
   i.e., heedlessly casts off. Hippolytus, in his Summary of the Peratic
   Heresy in book x., has aphietai eike, which Cruice translates temere
   absolvuntur. Schneidewin has in the same passage aphietai merely, and
   translates it abjiciuntur. In both places Bernays suggests ophioeide,
   i.e., those of the nature of the Serpent.
     

   Chapter VIII.--The Peratæ Derive Their System from the Astrologers;
   This Proved by a Statement of the Astrological Theories of the Zodiac;
   Hence the Terminology of the Peratic Heretics.

   Let us, then, in the first place, learn how (the Peratists), deriving
   this doctrine from astrologers, act despitefully towards Christ,
   working destruction for those who follow them in an error of this
   description. For the astrologers, alleging that there is one world,
   divide it into the twelve fixed portions of the zodiacal signs, and
   call the world of the fixed zodiacal signs one immoveable world; and
   the other they affirm to be a world of erratic (signs), both in power,
   and position, and number, and that it extends as far as the moon. [462]
   And (they lay down), that (one) world derives from (the other) world a
   certain power, and mutual participation (in that power), and that the
   subjacent obtain this participation from the superjacent (portions). In
   order, however, that what is (here) asserted may be perspicuous, I
   shall one by one employ those very expressions of the astrologers; (and
   in doing so) I shall only be reminding my readers of statements
   previously made in the department of the work where we have explained
   the entire art of the astrologers. What, then, the opinions are which
   those (speculators) entertain, are as follow:--

   (Their doctrine is), that from an emanation of the stars the
   generations of the subjacent (parts) is consummated.  For, as they
   wistfully gazed upward upon heaven, the Chaldeans asserted that (the
   seven stars) [463] contain a reason for the efficient causes of the
   occurrence of all the events that happen unto us, and that the parts of
   the fixed zodiacal signs co-operate (in this influence). Into twelve
   (parts they divide the zodiacal circle), and each zodiacal sign into
   thirty portions, and each portion into sixty diminutive parts; for so
   they denominate the very smallest parts, and those that are
   indivisible. And of the zodiacal signs, they term some male, but others
   feminine; and some with two bodies, but others not so; and some
   tropical, whereas others firm. The male signs, then, are either
   feminine, which possess a co-operative nature for the procreation of
   males, (or are themselves productive of females.) For Aries is a male
   zodiacal sign, but Taurus female; and the rest (are denominated)
   according to the same analogy, some male, but others female. And I
   suppose that the Pythagoreans, being swayed from such (considerations),
   style the Monad male, and the Duad female; and, again, the Triad male,
   and analogically the remainder of the even and odd numbers. Some,
   however, dividing each zodiacal sign into twelve parts, employ almost
   the same method. For example, in Aries, they style the first of the
   twelve parts both Aries and a male, but the second both Taurus and a
   female, and the third both Gemini and a male; and the same plan is
   pursued in the case of the rest of the parts. And they assert that
   there are signs with two bodies, viz., Gemini and the signs
   diametrically opposite, namely Sagittarius, and Virgo, and Pisces, and
   that the rest have not two bodies. And (they state) that some are
   likewise tropical, and when the sun stands in these, he causes great
   turnings [464] of the surrounding (sign). Aries is a sign of this
   description, and that which is diametrically opposite to it, just as
   Libra, and Capricorn, and Cancer. For in Aries is the vernal turning,
   and in Capricorn that of winter, and in Cancer that of summer, and in
   Libra that of autumn.

   The details, however, concerning this system we have minutely explained
   in the book preceding this; and from it any one who wishes instruction
   (on the point), may learn how it is that the originators of this
   Peratic heresy, viz., Euphrates the Peratic, and Celbes the Carystian,
   [465] have, in the transference (into their own system of opinions from
   these sources), made alterations in name only, while in reality they
   have put forward similar tenets. (Nay more), they have, with immoderate
   zeal, themselves devoted (their attention) to the art (of the
   astrologers). For also the astrologers speak of the limits of the
   stars, in which they assert that the dominant stars have greater
   influence; as, for instance, on some they act injuriously, while on
   others they act well. And of these they denominate some malicious, and
   some beneficent. And (stars) are said to look upon one another, and to
   harmonize with each other, so that they appear according to (the shape
   of) a triangle or square. The stars, looking on one another, are
   figured according to (the shape of [466] ) a triangle, having an
   intervening distance of the extent of three zodiacal signs; whereas
   (those that have an interval of) two zodiacal signs are figured
   according to (the shape of) a square. And (their doctrine is), that as
   in the same way as in a man, the subjacent parts sympathize with the
   head, and the head likewise sympathizes with the subjacent parts, so
   all terrestrial (sympathize) with super-lunar [467] objects. But (the
   astrologers go further than this [468] ); for there exists (according
   to them) a certain difference and incompatibility [469] between these,
   so as that they do not involve one and the same union. This combination
   and divergence of the stars, which is a Chaldean (tenet), has been
   arrogated to themselves by those of whom we have previously spoken.

   Now these, falsifying the name of truth, proclaim as a doctrine of
   Christ an insurrection of Æons and revolts of good into (the ranks of)
   evil powers; and they speak of the confederations of good powers with
   wicked ones. Denominating them, therefore, Toparchai and Proastioi,
   [470] and (though thus) framing for themselves very many other names
   not suggested (to them from other sources), they have yet unskilfully
   systematized the entire imaginary doctrine of the astrologers
   concerning the stars. And since they have introduced a supposition
   pregnant with immense error, they shall be refuted through the
   instrumentality of our admirable arrangement. For I shall set down, in
   contrast with the previously mentioned Chaldaic art of the astrologers,
   some of the Peratic [471] treatises, from which, by means of
   comparison, there will be an opportunity of perceiving how the Peratic
   doctrines are those confessedly of the astrologers, not of Christ.
     

   [462] Or, "is part of the moon."

   [463] Some omissions here are supplied from Sextus Empiricus.

   [464] Or, "produces alterations and causes turnings."

   [465] Celbes, as observed in a former note, has two other forms in The
   Refutation, viz., Acembes and Ademes. He is called Carystius, and the
   other founder of the heresy Peraticus. As the latter term is frequently
   used to designate Euboea, i.e., the country beyond (peran) the
   continent, it is inferred that Carystius has a similar import. This
   would seem placed beyond conjecture by a passage (Strom., vii. vol. ii.
   p. 555) in Clemens Alexandrinus, already alluded to, who says that some
   heresies, e.g., those of the Marcionites and Basilidians, derived their
   denomination from the names, whereas others from the country, of their
   founders. As an instance of the latter, he mentions the Peratics (see
   note 4, p. 62, [and note 6, p. 58]).

   [466] Some deficiencies in the text are filled up from Sextus
   Empiricus.

   [467] Or, "celestial."

   [468] This expression alla gar requires to have the ellipsis supplied
   as above. It may be freely rendered "nay more." Miller reads Alle gar,
   i.e. "There is some other difference," etc.; but this does not agree
   with Sextus Empiricus.

   [469] Or, "sympathy:"  sumpatheia is, however, properly altered into
   asumpatheia on the authority of Sextus.

   [470] i.e., "Rulers of localities and suburbans."

   [471] The Peratic heresy both Hippolytus and Theodoret state to have
   originated from Euphrates. Origen, on the other hand, states (Contr.
   Cels., vi. 28, [vol. iv. p. 586]) that Euphrates was founder of the
   Ophites. The inference from this is, that Origen was not author of The
   Refutation.
     

   Chapter IX.--System of the Peratæ Explained Out of One of Their Own
   Books.

   It seems, then, expedient to set forth a certain one of the books held
   [472] in repute amongst them, in which the following passage [473]
   occurs: "I am a voice of arousal from slumber in the age of night.
   Henceforward I commence to strip the power which is from chaos. The
   power is that of the lowest depth of mud, which uprears the slime of
   the incorruptible (and) humid expanse of space. And it is the entire
   power of the convulsion, which, ever in motion, and presenting the
   colour of water, whirls things on that are stationary, restrains things
   tremulous, sets things free as they proceed, lightens [474] things as
   they abide, removes things on the increase, a faithful steward of the
   track of the breezes, enjoying the things disgorged from the twelve
   eyes of the law, [475] (and) manifesting a seal [476] to the power
   which along with itself distributes the downborne invisible waters, and
   has been called Thalassa. This power ignorance has been accustomed to
   denominate Cronus, guarded with chains because he tightly bound the
   fold of the dense and misty and obscure and murky Tartarus. According
   to the image of this were produced Cepheus, Prometheus, (and) Japetus.
   The Power to which has been entrusted Thalassa [477] is hermaphrodite.
   And it fastens the hissing sound arising from the twelve mouths into
   twelve pipes, and pours it forth. And the power itself is subtle, and
   removes the controlling, boisterous, upward motion (of the sea), and
   seals the tracks of its paths, lest (any antagonistic power) should
   wage war or introduce any alteration. The tempestuous daughter of this
   one is a faithful protectress of all sorts of waters. Her name is
   Chorzar. Ignorance is in the habit of styling this (power) Neptune,
   according to whose image was produced Glaucus, Melicertes, Ino, Nebroë.
   [478] He that is encircled with the pyramid of twelve angels, [479] and
   darkens the gate into the pyramid with various colours, and completes
   the entire in the sable hues of Night: this one ignorance denominated
   Cronus. [480] And his ministers were five,--first U, second Aoai, third
   Uo, fourth Uoab, fifth...Other trustworthy managers (there are) of his
   province of night and day, who repose in their own power. Ignorance
   denominated these the erratic stars, from whom depends a corruptible
   generation. Manager of the rising of the star [481] is
   Carphacasemeocheir, (and) Eccabbacara (is the same). Ignorance is in
   the habit of denominating these Curetes chief of the winds; third in
   order is Ariel, according to whose image was generated Æolus, Briares.
   And chief of the twelve-houred nocturnal (power) is Soclan, whom
   ignorance is accustomed to style Osiris; (and) according to the image
   of this one was born Admetus, Medea, Helen, Æthusa. Chief of the
   twelve-houred diurnal power is Euno. This is manager of the rising of
   the star Protocamarus and of the ethereal (region), but ignorance has
   denominated him Isis. A sign of this one is the Dog-star, according to
   whose image were born Ptolemæus son of Arsinoe, Didyma, Cleopatra, and
   Olympias. God's right-hand power is that which ignorance has
   denominated Rhea, according to whose image were produced Attis, Mygdon,
   [482] (and) OEnone. The left-hand power has lordship over sustenance,
   and ignorance is in the habit of styling this Ceres, (while) her name
   is Bena; and according to the image of this one were born Celeus,
   Triptolemus, Misyr, and Praxidica. [483] The right-hand power has
   lordship over fruits. This one ignorance has denominated Mena,
   according to whose image were born Bumegas, [484] Ostanes, Mercury
   Trismegistus, Curites, Petosiris, Zodarium, Berosus, Astrampsuchus,
   (and) Zoroaster. The left-hand power is (lord) of fire, (and) ignorance
   has denominated this one Vulcan, according to whose image were born
   Ericthonius, Achilles, Capaneus, Phaëthon, [485] Meleager, Tydeus,
   Enceladus, Raphael, Suriel, (and) Omphale.  There are three
   intermediate powers suspended from air, authors of generation. These
   ignorance has been in the habit of denominating Fates; and according to
   the image of these were produced the house of Priam, the house of
   Laius, Ino, Autonoe, Agave, Athamas, Procne, Danaides, and Peliades. A
   power (there is) hermaphrodite, always continuing in infancy, never
   waxing old, cause of beauty, pleasure, maturity, desire, and
   concupiscence; and ignorance has been accustomed to style this Eros,
   according to whose image were born Paris, Narcissus, Ganymede,
   Endymion, Tithonus, Icarius, Leda, Amymone, Thetis, Hesperides, Jason,
   Leander, (and) Hero." These are Proastioi up to Æther, for with this
   title also he inscribes the book.
     

   [472] Hippolytus at the end of this chapter mentions the title of one
   of their books, Hoi proasteioi heos aitheros, "The Suburbans up to the
   Air." Bunsen suggests Peratai heos aitheros, "The Transcendental
   Etherians." (See note 1 supra.)

   [473] The Abbe Cruice considers that the following system of cosmogony
   is translated into Greek from some Chaldaic or Syriac work. He
   recognises in it likewise a Jewish element, to be accounted for from
   the fact that the Jews during the Babylonish captivity imbibed the
   principles of the Oriental philosophy. What, therefore, is given by
   Hippolytus may have a Judaistic origin.

   [474] Schneidewin considers the text here corrupt.

   [475] The Abbe Cruice observes that the reference here is to the second
   book of the law (Ex. xv. 27), where mention is made of the twelve
   fountains of Elim. The Hebrew word (yn) stands for both an eye and a
   fountain. Hence the error by the Greek translator.

   [476] i.e., a poetic expression, as Cruice remarks, for closing the
   seal. (See Job ix. 7.)

   [477] Schneidewin refers us to a passage from Berosus, who affirms that
   this person was styled Thalatta by the Greeks, Thalath by the
   Chaldeans; another denomination being Omorka, or Omoroka, or Marcaia.
   The Abbe Cruice, however, sets little value on these names, which,
   following the judgment of Scaliger, he pronounces spurious. It is
   unnecessary to remind scholars that the authenticity of Berosus has
   collapsed under the attacks of modern criticism.

   [478] Miller suggests Nephele, Cruice Nebo.

   [479] Cruice thinks this may be a figure of the year and of twelve
   months.

   [480] Miller has Koren.

   [481] Or, "air."

   [482] Miller reads Mugdone, others Mugdone.

   [483] Miller has 'Apraxia.

   [484] Miller suggests Bouzuges.

   [485] Miller reads Phlegon.
     

   Chapter X.--The Peratic Heresy Nominally Different from Astrology, But
   Really the Same System Allegorized.

   It has been easily made evident to all, that the heresy of the Peratæ
   is altered in name only from the (art) of the astrologers. And the rest
   of the books of these (heretics) contain the same method, if it were
   agreeable to any one to wade through them all. For, as I said, they
   suppose that the causes of the generation of all begotten things are
   things unbegotten and superjacent, and that the world with us has been
   produced after the mode of emanation, which (world) they denominate
   formal. And (they maintain) that all those stars together which are
   beheld in the firmament have been causes of the generation of this
   world. They have, however, altered the name of these, as one may
   perceive from the Proastioi by means of a comparison (of the two
   systems). And secondly, according to the same method as that whereby
   the world was made from a supernal emanation, they affirm that in this
   manner objects here derive from the emanation of the stars their
   generation, and corruption, and arrangement. Since, then, astrologers
   are acquainted with the horoscope, and meridian, and setting, and the
   point opposite the meridian; and since these stars occupy at different
   times different positions [486] in space, on account of the perpetual
   revolution of the universe, there are (necessarily) at different
   periods different declinations towards a centre, and (different)
   ascensions to centres. [487] (Now the Peratic heretics), affixing an
   allegorical import to this arrangement of the astrologers, delineate
   the centre, as it were, a god and monad and lord over universal
   generation, whereas the declination (is regarded by them as a power) on
   the left, and ascension on the right. When any one, therefore, falling
   in with the treatises of these (heretics), finds mention among them of
   right or left power, let him recur to the centre, and the declination,
   and the ascension (of the Chaldean sages, and) he will clearly observe
   that the entire system of these (Peratæ) consists of the astrological
   doctrine.
     

   [486] ginomenon; some read kinoumenon, i.e., have different motions.

   [487] kentrois:  Schneidewin suggests kentron.
     

   Chapter XI.--Why They Call Themselves Peratæ; Their Theory of
   Generation Supported by an Appeal to Antiquity; Their Interpretation of
   the Exodus of Israel; Their System of "The Serpent;" Deduced by Them
   from Scripture; This the Real Import of the Doctrines of the
   Astrologers.

   They denominate themselves, however, Peratæ, imagining that none of
   those things existing by generation can escape the determined lot for
   those things that derive their existence from generation. For if, says
   (the Peratic), anything be altogether begotten, it also perishes, as
   also is the opinion of the Sibyl. [488] But we alone, he says, who are
   conversant with the necessity of generation, and the paths through
   which man has entered into the world, and who have been accurately
   instructed (in these matters), we alone are competent to proceed
   through and pass beyond destruction. [489] But water, he says, is
   destruction; nor did the world, he says, perish by any other thing
   quicker than by water. Water, however, is that which rolls around among
   the Proastioi, (and) they assert (it to be) Cronus. For such a power,
   he says, is of the colour of water; and this power, he says--that is,
   Cronus--none of those things existent by generation can escape. For
   Cronus is a cause to every generation, in regard of succumbing under
   destruction, and there could not exist (an instance of) generation in
   which Cronus does not interfere. This, he says, is what the poets also
   affirm, and what even appals the gods:--

   "For know, he says, this earth and spacious heaven above,

   And Styx' flooded water, which is the oath

   That greatest is, and dreaded most by gods of happy life."

   And not only, he says, do the poets make this statement, but already
   also the very wisest men among the Greeks. And Heraclitus is even one
   of these, employing the following words: "For to souls water becomes
   death." This death, (the Peratic) says, seizes the Egyptians in the Red
   Sea, along with their chariots.  All, however, who are ignorant (of
   this fact), he says, are Egyptians. And this, they assert, is the
   departure from Egypt, (that is,) from the body. For they suppose little
   Egypt to be body, and that it crosses the Red Sea--that is, the water
   of corruption, which is Cronus--and that it reaches a place beyond the
   Red Sea, that is, generation; and that it comes into the wilderness,
   that is, that it attains a condition independent of generation, where
   there exist promiscuously all the gods of destruction and the God of
   salvation.

   Now, he says, the stars are the gods of destruction, which impose upon
   existent things the necessity of alterable generation. These, he says,
   Moses denominated serpents of the wilderness, which gnaw and utterly
   ruin those who imagined that they had crossed the Red Sea. To those,
   then, he says, who of the children of Israel were bitten in the
   wilderness, Moses exhibited the real and perfect serpent; and they who
   believed on this serpent were not bitten in the wilderness, that is,
   (were not assailed) by (evil) powers. No one therefore, he says, is
   there who is able to save and deliver those that come forth from Egypt,
   that is, from the body and from this world, unless alone the serpent
   that is perfect and replete with fulness. Upon this (serpent), he says,
   he who fixes his hope is not destroyed by the snakes of the wilderness,
   that is, by the gods of generation. (This statement) is written, he
   says, in a book of Moses. This serpent, he says, is the power that
   attended Moses, [490] the rod that was turned into a serpent. The
   serpents, however, of the magicians--(that is,) the gods of
   destruction--withstood the power of Moses in Egypt, but the rod of
   Moses reduced them all to subjection and slew them. This universal
   serpent is, he says, the wise discourse of Eve. This, he says, is the
   mystery of Edem, this the river of Edem; this the mark that was set
   upon Cain, that any one who findeth him might not kill him. This, he
   says, [491] is Cain, [492] whose sacrifice [493] the god of this world
   did not accept. The gory sacrifice, however, of Abel he approved of;
   for the ruler of this world rejoices in (offerings of) blood. This, he
   says, is he who appeared in the last days, in form of a man, in the
   times of Herod, being born after the likeness of Joseph, who was sold
   by the hand of his brethren, to whom alone belonged the coat of many
   colours.  This, he says, is he who is according to the likeness of
   Esau, whose garment--he not being himself present--was blessed; who did
   not receive, he says, the benediction uttered by him of enfeebled
   vision. [494] He acquired, however, wealth from a source independent of
   this, receiving nothing from him whose eyes were dim; and Jacob saw his
   countenance, [495] as a man beholds the face of God. In regard of this,
   he says, it has been written that "Nebrod was a mighty hunter before
   the Lord." [496] And there are, he says, many who closely imitate this
   (Nimrod): as numerous are they as the gnawing (serpents) which were
   seen in the wilderness by the children of Israel, from which that
   perfect serpent which Moses set up delivered those that were bitten.
   This, he says, is that which has been declared: "In the same manner as
   Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so also must the Son of
   man be lifted up." [497] According to the likeness of this was made in
   the desert the brazen serpent which Moses set up. Of this alone, he
   says, the image is in heaven, always conspicuous in light.

   This, he says, is the great beginning respecting which Scripture has
   spoken. Concerning this, he says it has been declared: "In the
   beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God. This was in the beginning with God, all things were made by Him,
   and without Him was not one thing that was made. And what was formed in
   Him is life." [498] And in Him, he says, has been formed Eve; (now) Eve
   is life. This, however, he says, is Eve, mother of all living, [499]
   --a common nature, that is, of gods, angels, immortals, mortals,
   irrational creatures, (and) rational ones. For, he says, the expression
   "all" he uttered of all (existences). And if the eyes of any, he says,
   are blessed, this one, looking upward on the firmament, will behold at
   the mighty summit [500] of heaven the beauteous image of the serpent,
   turning itself, and becoming an originating principle of every (species
   of) motion to all things that are being produced. He will (thereby)
   know that without him nothing consists, either of things in heaven, or
   things on earth. or things under the earth. Not night, not moon, not
   fruits, not generation, not wealth, not sustenance, not anything at all
   of existent things, is without his guidance. In regard of this, he
   says, is the great wonder which is beheld in the firmament by those who
   are able to observe it. For, he says, at this top of his head, a fact
   which is more incredible than all things to those who are ignorant,
   "are setting and rising mingled one with other." This it is in regard
   of which ignorance is in the habit of affirming:  in heaven

   "Draco revolves, marvel mighty of monster dread." [501]

   And on both sides of him have been placed Corona and Lyra; and above,
   near the top itself of the head, is visible the piteous man
   "Engonasis,"

   "Holding the right foot's end of Draco fierce." [502]

   And at the back of Engonasis is an imperfect serpent, with both hands
   tightly secured by Anguitenens, and being hindered from touching Corona
   that lies beside the perfect serpent.
     

   [488] See Oracula Sibyllina Fragm., ii. ver. 1.

   [489] perasai; hence their name Peratics, i.e., Transcendentalists.
   Bunsen considers, however, that such a derivation as this was not the
   true one (see note 1, p. 60), but merely an after-thought. The title of
   one of the Peratic treatises, as altered by Bunsen from Hoi proasteioi
   heos aitheros into Hoi Peratai heos aitheros, i.e., "the Transcendental
   Etherians," would agree with their subsequent assumption of this title.
   [Bunsen, i. p. 37.]

   [490] Ex. iv. 2-4, 17; vii. 9-13.

   [491] Or, "they say."

   [492] Gen. iv. 15.

   [493] Gen. iv. 5.

   [494] Gen. xxvii. 1.

   [495] Gen. xxxiii. 10.

   [496] Gen. x. 9.

   [497] John iii. 14, 15.

   [498] John i. 1-4.

   [499] The Abbe Cruise thinks that Hippolytus is here quoting from the
   Gospel of Eve (see Epiph., Hær., xxvi. 2).

   [500] akra: this is a conjectural reading instead of arche.

   [501] Aratus, Phænom., v. 62.

   [502] Ibid., v. 46.
     

   Chapter XII.--Compendious Statement of the Doctrines of the Peratæ.

   This is the diversified wisdom of the Peratic heresy, which it is
   difficult to declare in its entirety, so intricate is it on account of
   its seeming to consist of the astrological art. As far forth, then, as
   this is possible, we shall briefly explain the whole force of this
   (heresy). In order, however, that we may by a compendious statement
   elucidate the entire doctrine of these persons, it appears expedient to
   subjoin the following observations.  According to them, the universe is
   Father, Son, (and) Matter; (but) each of these three has endless
   capacities in itself.  Intermediate, then, between the Matter and the
   Father sits the Son, the Word, the Serpent, always being in motion
   towards the unmoved Father, and (towards) Matter itself in motion. And
   at one time he is turned towards the Father, and receives the powers
   into his own person; but at another time takes up these powers, and is
   turned towards Matter. And Matter, (though) devoid of attribute, and
   being unfashioned, moulds (into itself) forms from the Son which the
   Son moulded from the Father.

   But the Son derives shape from the Father after a mode ineffable, and
   unspeakable, and unchangeable; (that is,) in such a manner as Moses
   says that the colours of the conceived (kine) flowed from the rods
   [503] which were fixed in the drinking-troughs. And in like manner,
   again, that capacities flowed also from the Son into Matter, similarly
   to the power in reference to conception which came from the rods upon
   the conceived (kine). And the difference of colours, and the
   dissimilarity which flowed from the rods through the waters upon the
   sheep, is, he says, the difference of corruptible and incorruptible
   generation. As, however, one who paints from nature, though he takes
   nothing away from animals, transfers by his pencil all forms to the
   canvas; so the Son, by a power which belongs to himself, transfers
   paternal marks from the Father into Matter. All the paternal marks are
   here, and there are not any more. For if any one, he says, of those
   (beings) which are here will have strength to perceive that he is a
   paternal mark transferred hither from above, (and that he is)
   incarnate--just as by the conception resulting from the rod a something
   white is produced,--he is of the same substance altogether with the
   Father in heaven, and returns thither. If, however, he may not happen
   upon this doctrine, neither will he understand the necessity of
   generation, just as an abortion born at night will perish at night.
   When, therefore, he says, the Saviour observes, "your Father which is
   in heaven," [504] he alludes to that one from whom the Son deriving his
   characteristics has transferred them hither. When, however, (Jesus)
   remarks, "Your father is a murderer from the beginning," [505] he
   alludes to the Ruler and Demiurge of matter, who, appropriating the
   marks delivered from the Son, generated him here who from the beginning
   was a murderer, for his work causes corruption and death.

   No one, then, he says, can be saved or return (into heaven) without the
   Son, and the Son is the Serpent. For as he brought down from above the
   paternal marks, so again he carries up from thence those marks roused
   from a dormant condition and rendered paternal characteristics,
   substantial ones from the unsubstantial Being, transferring them hither
   from thence. This, he says, is what is spoken: "I am the door." [506]
   And he transfers (those marks), he says, [507] to those who close the
   eyelid, as the naphtha drawing the fire in every direction towards
   itself; nay rather, as the magnet (attracting) the iron and not
   anything else, or just as the backbone of the sea falcon, the gold and
   nothing else, or as the chaff is led by the amber. In this manner, he
   says, is the portrayed, perfect, and consubstantial genus drawn again
   from the world by the Serpent; nor does he (attract) anything else, as
   it has been sent down by him. For a proof of this, they adduce the
   anatomy [508] of the brain, assimilating, from the fact of its
   immobility, the brain itself to the Father, and the cerebellum to the
   Son, because of its being moved and being of the form of (the head of)
   a serpent. And they allege that this (cerebellum), by an ineffable and
   inscrutable process, attracts through the pineal gland the spiritual
   and life-giving substance emanating from the vaulted chamber [509] (in
   which the brain is embedded). And on receiving this, the cerebellum in
   an ineffable manner imparts the ideas, just as the Son does, to matter;
   or, in other words, the seeds and the genera of the things produced
   according to the flesh flow along into the spinal marrow. Employing
   this exemplar, (the heretics) seem to adroitly introduce their secret
   mysteries, which are delivered in silence. Now it would be impious for
   us to declare these; yet it is easy to form an idea of them, by reason
   of the many statements that have been made.
     

   [503] Gen. xxx. 37-39.

   [504] Matt. vii. 11.

   [505] John viii. 44.

   [506] John x. 7.

   [507] There is a hiatus here. Miller, who also suggests diapherei
   instead of metapherei supplies the deficiency as translated above. The
   Abbe Cruice fills up the hiatus by words taken from a somewhat similar
   passage in the third chapter of book viii., but the obscurity still
   remains.  Miller thinks there is a reference to Isa. vi. 10.

   [508] This theory has been previously alluded to by Hippolytus in the
   last chapter of book iv.

   [509] kamariou:  some would read makariou ["the dome of thought, the
   palace of the soul"].
     

   Chapter XIII.--The Peratic Heresy Not Generally Known.

   But since I consider that I have plainly explained the Peratic heresy,
   and by many (arguments) have rendered evident (a system that hitherto)
   has always escaped notice, and is altogether [510] a tissue of fable,
   and one that disguises its own peculiar venom, it seems expedient to
   advance no further statement beyond those already put forward; for the
   opinions propounded by (the heretics) themselves are sufficient for
   their own condemnation.
     

   [510] pantapasi:  some read panta pasi. Cruice suggests pasin
   epititheimenen, i.e., one that plots against all.
     

   Chapter XIV.--The System of the Sethians; Their Triad of Infinite
   Principles; Their Heresy Explained; Their Interpretation of the
   Incarnation.

   Let us then see what the Sithians [511] affirm. To these it appears
   that there are three definite principles of the universe, and that each
   of these principles possesses infinite powers. And when they speak of
   powers [512] let him that heareth take into account that they make this
   statement. Everything whatsoever you discern by an act of intelligence,
   or also omit (to discern) as not being understood, this by nature is
   fitted to become each of the principles, as in the human soul every art
   whatsoever which is made the subject of instruction. Just for instance,
   he says, this child will be a musician, having waited the requisite
   time for (acquiring a knowledge of) the harp; or a geometrician,
   (having previously undergone the necessary study for acquiring a
   knowledge) of geometry; (or) a grammarian, (after having sufficiently
   studied) grammar; (or) a workman, (having acquired a practical
   acquaintance) with a handicraftsman's business; and to one brought into
   contact with the rest of the arts a similar occurrence will take place.
   Now of principles, he says, the substances are light and darkness; and
   of these, spirit is intermediate without admixture. The spirit,
   however, is that which has its appointed place in the midst of darkness
   which is below, and light which is above. It is not spirit as a current
   of wind, or some gentle breeze that can be felt; but, as it were, some
   odour of ointment or of incense formed out of a compound. (It is) a
   subtle power, that insinuates itself by means of some impulsive quality
   in a fragrance, which is inconceivable and better than could be
   expressed by words. Since, however, light is above and darkness below,
   and spirit is intermediate in such a way as stated between these; and
   since light is so constituted, that, like a ray of the sun, it shines
   from above upon the underlying darkness; and again, since the fragrance
   of the spirit, holding an intermediate place, is extended and carried
   in every direction, as in the case of incense-offerings placed upon
   fire, we detect the fragrance that is being wafted in every direction:
   when, I say, there is a power of this description belonging unto the
   principles which are classified under three divisions, the power of
   spirit and light simultaneously exists in the darkness that is situated
   underneath them. But the darkness is a terrible water, into which light
   is absorbed and translated into a nature of the same description with
   spirit. The darkness, however, is not devoid of intelligence, but
   altogether reflective, and is conscious that, where the light has been
   abstracted from the darkness, the darkness remains isolated, invisible,
   obscure, impotent, inoperative, (and) feeble. Wherefore it is
   constrained, by all its reflection and understanding, to collect into
   itself the lustre and scintillation of light with the fragrance of the
   spirit. And it is possible to behold an image of the nature of these in
   the human countenance; for instance, the pupil of the eye, dark from
   the subjacent humours, (but) illuminated with spirit.  As, then, the
   darkness seeks after the splendour, that it may keep in bondage the
   spark, and may have perceptive power, so the light and spirit seek
   after the power that belongs to themselves, and strive to uprear, and
   towards each other to carry up their intermingled powers into the dark
   and formidable water lying underneath.

   But all the powers of the three originating principles, which are as
   regards number indefinitely infinite, are each according to its own
   substance reflective and intelligent, unnumbered in multitude. And
   since what are reflective and intelligent are numberless in multitude,
   while they continue by themselves, they are all at rest. If, however,
   power approaches power, the dissimilarity of (what is set in)
   juxtaposition produces a certain motion and energy, which are formed
   from the motion resulting from the concourse effected by the
   juxtaposition of the coalescing powers.  For the concourse of the
   powers ensues, just like any mark of a seal [513] that is impressed by
   means of the concourse correspondingly with (the seal) which prints the
   figure on the substances that are brought up (into contact with it).
   Since, therefore, the powers of the three principles are infinite in
   number, and from infinite powers (arise) infinite concourses, images of
   infinite seals are necessarily produced.  These images, therefore, are
   the forms of the different sorts of animals. From the first great
   concourse, then, of the three principles, ensues a certain great form,
   a seal of heaven and earth. The heaven and the earth have a figure
   similar to the womb, having a navel in the midst; and if, he says, any
   one is desirous of bringing this figure under the organ of vision, let
   him artfully scrutinize the pregnant womb of whatsoever animal he
   wishes, and he will discover an image of the heaven and the earth, and
   of the things which in the midst of all are unalterably situated
   underneath.

   (And so it is, that the first great concourse of the three principles)
   has produced such a figure of heaven and earth as is similar to a womb
   after the first coition. But, again, in the midst of the heaven and the
   earth have been generated infinite concourses of powers. And each
   concourse did not effect and fashion anything else than a seal of
   heaven and earth similar to a womb. But, again, in the earth, from the
   infinite seals are produced infinite crowds of various animals. But
   into all this infinity of the different animals under heaven is
   diffused and distributed, along with the light, the fragrance of the
   Spirit from above. From the water, therefore, has been produced a
   first-begotten originating principle, viz., wind, (which is) violent
   and boisterous, and a cause of all generation. For producing a sort of
   ferment in the waters, (the wind) uplifts waves out of the waters; and
   the motion [514] of the waves, just as when some impulsive power of
   pregnancy is the origin of the production of a man or mind, [515] is
   caused when (the ocean), excited by the impulsive power of spirit, is
   propelled forward. When, however, this wave that has been raised out of
   the water by the wind, and rendered pregnant in its nature, has within
   itself obtained the power, possessed by the female, of generation, it
   holds together the light scattered from above along with the fragrance
   of the spirit--that is, mind moulded in the different species. And this
   (light) is a perfect God, who from the unbegotten radiance above, and
   from the spirit, is borne down into human nature as into a temple, by
   the impulsive power of Nature, and by the motion of wind. And it is
   produced from water being commingled [516] and blended with bodies as
   if it were a salt [517] of existent things, and a light of darkness.
   And it struggles to be released from bodies, and is not able to find
   liberation and an egress for itself. For a very diminutive spark, a
   severed splinter from above like the ray of a star, has been mingled in
   the much compounded waters of many (existences), [518] as, says he,
   (David) remarks in a psalm. [519] Every thought, then, and solicitude
   actuating the supernal light is as to how and in what manner mind may
   be liberated, by the death of the depraved and dark body, from the
   Father that is below, which is the wind that with noise [520] and
   tumult uplifted the waves, and who generated a perfect mind his own
   Son; not, however, being his peculiar (offspring) substantially. For he
   was a ray (sent down) from above, from that perfect light, (and) was
   overpowered in the dark, [521] and formidable, and bitter, and defiled
   water; and he is a luminous spirit borne down over the water. [522]
   When, therefore, the waves that have been upreared from the waters have
   received within themselves the power of generation possessed by
   females, they contain, as a certain womb, in different species, the
   infused radiance, so as that it is visible in the case of all animals.
   [523] But the wind, at the same time fierce and formidable, [524]
   whirling along, is, in respect of its hissing sound, like a serpent.
   [525]

   First, then, from the wind--that is, from the serpent--has resulted the
   originating principle of generation in the manner declared, all things
   having simultaneously received the principle of generation. After,
   then, the light and the spirit had been received, he says, into the
   polluted and baneful (and) disordered womb, the serpent--the wind of
   the darkness, the first-begotten of the waters--enters within and
   produces man, and the impure womb neither loves nor recognises any
   other form. The perfect Word of supernal light being therefore
   assimilated (in form) to the beast, (that is,) the serpent, entered
   into the defiled womb, having deceived (the womb) through the
   similitude of the beast itself, in order that (the Word) may loose the
   chains that encircle the perfect mind which has been begotten amidst
   impurity of womb by the primal offspring of water, (namely,) serpent,
   wind, (and) beast. [526] This, he says, is the form of the servant,
   [527] and this the necessity of the Word of God coming down into the
   womb of a virgin. But he says it is not sufficient that the Perfect
   Man, the Word, has entered into the womb of a virgin, and loosed the
   pangs [528] which were in that darkness. Nay, more than this was
   requisite; for after his entrance [529] into the foul mysteries of the
   womb, he was washed, and drank of the cup of life-giving bubbling
   water. [530] And it was altogether needful that he should drink who was
   about to strip off the servile form, and assume celestial raiment.
     

   [511] This is the form in which the name occurs in Hippolytus, but the
   correct one is Sethians. As regards this sect, see Irenæus, Contr.
   Hæres., i. 30; Tertullian, Præscript., c. lxvii.; Theodoret, Hæret.
   Fabul., i. 14; Epiphanius, Advers. Hæres., c. xxviii., xxxvii., and
   xxxix.; Augustine, De Hæret., c. xix.; Josephus, Antiq. Judaic., i. 2;
   Suidas on the word "Seth."

   [512] For dunameis ...logizestho, Bernays reads dunatai...logizesthai:
   "While these make (such) assertions, he is able to calculate," etc.

   [513] Or, "form of a seal."

   [514] Or, "production."

   [515] This is Cruice's mode of supplying the hiatus. Miller has "man or
   ox."

   [516] Or, "concealed."

   [517] halas ton genomenon:  Miller reads alalon

   [518] The hiatus, as filled up by Miller, is adopted above. The Abbe
   Cruice suggests the following emendation: "For there has been
   intermingled a certain very diminutive spark from the light
   (subsisting) along with the supernal fragrance, from the spirit
   producing, like a ray, composition in things dissolved, and dissolution
   in things compounded."

   [519] Ps. xxix. 3.

   [520] bromo: some read brasmo, i.e., agitation, literally a boiling up.

   [521] skoteino:  some read skolo (which is of similar import), crooked,
   i.e., involved, obscure.

   [522] Or, "the light."

   [523] A hiatus occurs here. The deficiency is supplied by Cruice from
   previous statements of Hippolytus, and is adopted above.

   [524] Or, "strong."

   [525] This passage is obscure. The translation above follows
   Schneidewin and Cruice. Miller's text would seem capable of this
   meaning: "The wind, simultaneously fierce and formidable, is whirled
   along like a trailing serpent supplied with wings." His text is, to
   surmati ophei paraplesios pterotos, but suggests pteroto; hos apo

   [526] Schneidewin has a full stop after "wind," and begins the next
   sentence with theriou (beast).

   [527] Phil. ii. 7.

   [528] Acts ii. 24.

   [529] Miller would read meta ta...exelthon, "after the foul mysteries
   of the womb he went forth," etc.

   [530] John iv. 7-14. For piein some read poiein, "a course which he
   must pursue who," etc.
     

   Chapter XV.--The Sethians Support Their Doctrines by an Allegorical
   Interpretation of Scripture; Their System Really Derived from Natural
   Philosophers and from the Orphic Rites; Adopt the Homeric Cosmogony.

   These are the statements which the patrons [531] of the Sethian
   doctrines make, as far as it is possible to declare in a few words.
   Their system, however, is made up (of tenets) from natural
   (philosophers), and of expressions uttered in reference to different
   other subjects; and transferring (the sense of) these to the Eternal
   [532] Logos, they explain them as we have declared. But they assert
   likewise that Moses confirms their doctrine when he says, "Darkness,
   and mist, and tempest." These, (the Sethian) says, are the three
   principles (of our system); or when he states that three were born in
   paradise--Adam, Eve, the serpent; or when he speaks of three (persons,
   namely) Cain, Abel, Seth; and again of three (others)--Shem, Ham, [533]
   Japheth; or when he mentions three patriarchs--Abraham, Isaac, Jacob;
   or when he speaks of the existence of three days before sun and moon;
   or when he mentions three laws--prohibitory, permissive, and
   adjudicatory of punishment. Now, a prohibitory law is as follows: "Of
   every tree that is in paradise thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree
   of the knowledge of good and evil thou mayest not eat." [534] But in
   the passage, "Come forth from thy land and from thy kindred, and hither
   into a land which I shall show thee," [535] this law, he says, is
   permissive; for one who is so disposed may depart, and one who is not
   so disposed may remain. But a law adjudicatory of punishment is that
   which makes the following declaration: "Thou shalt not commit adultery,
   thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal;" [536] for a penalty is
   awarded to each of these acts of wickedness.

   The entire system of their doctrine, however, is (derived) from [537]
   the ancient theologians Musæus, and Linus, and Orpheus, [538] who
   elucidates especially the ceremonies of initiation, as well as the
   mysteries themselves. For their doctrine concerning the womb is also
   the tenet of Orpheus; and the (idea of the) navel, [539] which is
   harmony, [540] is (to be found) with the same symbolism attached to it
   in the Bacchanalian orgies of Orpheus. But prior to the observance of
   the mystic rite of Celeus, and Triptolemus, and Ceres, and Proserpine,
   and Bacchus in Eleusis, these orgies have been celebrated and handed
   down to men in Phlium of Attica. [541] For antecedent to the Eleusinian
   mysteries, there are (enacted) in Phlium the orgies [542] of her
   denominated the "Great (Mother)." There is, however, a portico in this
   (city), and on the portico is inscribed a representation, (visible) up
   to the present day, of all the words which are spoken (on such
   occasions). Many, then, of the words inscribed upon that portico are
   those respecting which Plutarch institutes discussions in his ten books
   against [543] Empedocles. And in the greater [544] number of these
   books is also drawn the representation of a certain aged man,
   grey-haired, winged, [545] having his pudendum erectum, pursuing a
   retreating woman of azure colour. [546] And over the aged man is the
   inscription "phaos ruentes," and over the woman "pereëphicola." [547]
   But "phaos ruentes" [548] appears to be the light (which exists),
   according to the doctrine of the Sethians, and "phicola" the darkish
   water; while the space in the midst of these seems to be a harmony
   constituted from the spirit that is placed between. The name, however,
   of "phaos ruentes" manifests, as they allege, the flow from above of
   the light downwards. Wherefore one may reasonably assert that the
   Sethians celebrate rites among themselves, very closely bordering upon
   those orgies of the "Great (Mother" which are observed among) the
   Phliasians. And the poet likewise seems to bear his testimony to this
   triple division, when he remarks, "And all things have been triply
   divided, and everything obtains its (proper) distinction;" [549] that
   is, each member of the threefold division has obtained (a particular)
   capacity. But now, as regards the tenet that the subjacent water below,
   which is dark, ought, because the light has set (over it), to convey
   upwards and receive the spark borne down from (the light) itself; in
   the assertion of this tenet, I say, the all-wise Sethians appear to
   derive (their opinion) from Homer:--

   "By earth I sware, and yon broad Heaven above,

   And Stygian stream beneath, the weightiest oath

   Of solemn power, to bind the blessed gods." [550]

   That is, according to Homer, the gods suppose water to be loathsome and
   horrible. Now, similar to this is the doctrine of the Sethians, which
   affirms (water) to be formidable to the mind. [551]
     

   [531] prostatai.  This is a military expression applied to those placed
   in the foremost ranks of a battalion of soldiers; but it was also
   employed in civil affairs, to designate, for instance at Athens, those
   who protected the metoikoi (aliens), and others without the rights of
   citizenship.  Prostates was the Roman Patronus.

   [532] Or, "their own peculiar."

   [533] It is written Cham in the text.

   [534] Gen. ii. 16, 17.

   [535] Gen. xii. 1.

   [536] Ex. xx. 13-15; Deut. v. 17-19.

   [537] hupo, Miller.

   [538] These belong to the legendary period of Greek philosophy.  Musæus
   flourished among the Athenians, Linus among the Thebans, and Orpheus
   among the Thracians. They weaved their physical theories into crude
   theological systems, which subsequently suggested the cosmogony and
   theogony of Hesiod. See the translator's Treatise on Metaphysics, chap.
   ii. pp. 33, 34.

   [539] ouphalos: some read with greater probability phallos, which means
   the figure, generally wooden, of a membrum virile. This harmonizes with
   what Hippolytus has already mentioned respecting Osiris. A figure of
   this description was carried in solemn procession in the orgies of
   Bacchus as a symbol of the generative power of nature. The worship of
   the Lingam among the Hindoos is of the same description.

   [540] harmonia (Schneidewin).  Cruise reads andreia (manliness), which
   agrees with phallos (see preceding note). For phallos Schneidewin reads
   omphalos (navel).

   [541] "Of Achaia" (Meinekius, Vindic. Strab., p. 242).

   [542] The reading in Miller is obviously incorrect, viz., legomene
   megalegoria, for which he suggests megale heorte. Several other
   emendations have been proposed, but they scarcely differ from the
   rendering given above, which is coincident with what may be learned of
   these mysteries from other sources.

   [543] pros, or it might be rendered "respecting." A reference, however,
   to the catalogue of Empedocles' works, given by Fabricius (t. v. p.
   160), shows that for pros we should read eis.

   [544] pleiosi: Miller would read puleosi. i.e., gateways.

   [545] Or petrotos, intended for petrodes, "made of stone." [A winged
   phallus was worn by the women of Pompeii as an ornament, for which
   Christian women substituted a cross. See vol. iii., this series, p.
   104.]

   [546] kuanoeide:  some read kunoeide, i.e., like a dog.

   [547] Some read Persephone (Proserpine) Phlya.

   [548] For "phaos ruentes" some read "Phanes rueis," which is the
   expression found in the Orphic hymn (see Cruice's note).

   [549] Iliad, xv. 189. (See the passage from Hesiod given at the end of
   book i. of The Refutation.)

   [550] Iliad, xv. 36-38 (Lord Derby's translation); Odyssey, v. 185-187.

   [551] Miller reasonably proposes for to noi the reading stoicheio n,
   "which affirms water to be a formidable element."
     

   Chapter XVI.--The Sethian Theory Concerning "Mixture" And
   "Composition;" Application of It to Christ; Illustration from the Well
   of Ampa.

   These, and other assertions similar to these, are made (by the
   Sethians) in their interminable commentaries. They, however, persuade
   their disciples to become conversant with the theory respecting
   composition and mixture. But this theory has formed a subject of
   meditation to many, but (among others) also to Andronicus the
   Peripatetic. The Sethians, then, affirm that the theory concerning
   composition and mixture is constituted according to the following
   method: The luminous ray from above is intermingled, and the very
   diminutive spark is delicately blended in the dark waters beneath; and
   (both of these) become united, and are formed into one compound mass,
   just as a single savour (results) from the mixture of many
   incense-offerings in the fire, and (just as) an adept, by having a test
   in an acute sense of smell, ought to be able from the single odour of
   the incense to distinguish accurately each (ingredient) of the
   incense-offerings that have been mingled in the fire,--whether, for
   example, storax, and myrrh, and frankincense, or whatever other
   (ingredient) may be mixed (in the incense). They, however, employ also
   other examples, saying both that brass is mixed with gold, and that
   some art has been discovered which separates the brass from the gold.
   And, in like manner, if tin or brass, or any substance homogeneous with
   it, be discovered mixed with silver, these likewise, by some art
   superior to that of mixing, are distinguished. But already some one
   also distinguishes water mingled with wine. [552] So, say they, though
   all things are commingled, they are capable of being separated. Nay,
   but, he says, derive the same lesson from the case of animals. For when
   the animal is dead, each of its parts is separated; and when
   dissolution takes place, the animal in this way vanishes. This is, he
   says, what has been spoken: "I came not to send peace on the earth, but
   a sword," [553] --that is, the division and separation of the things
   that have been commingled. For each of the things that have been
   commingled is separated and divided when it reaches its proper place.
   For as there is one place of mixture for all animals, so also has there
   been established one (locality) of separation. And, he says, no one is
   aware of this (place), save we alone that have been born again,
   spiritual, not carnal, whose citizenship is in heaven above.

   In this manner insinuating themselves, they corrupt their pupils,
   partly by misusing the words spoken (by themselves), while they
   wickedly pervert, to serve any purpose they wish, what has been
   admirably said (in Scripture); and partly by concealing their nefarious
   conduct, by means of whatever comparisons they please. All these
   things, then, he says, that have been commingled, possess, as has been
   declared, their own particular place, and hurry towards their own
   peculiar (substances), as iron towards the magnet, and the chaff to the
   vicinity of amber, and the gold to the spur [554] of the sea falcon. In
   like manner, the ray [555] of light which has been commingled with the
   water, having obtained from discipline and instruction its own proper
   locality, hastens towards the Logos that comes from above in servile
   form; and along with the Logos exists as a logos in that place where
   the Logos is still: (the light, I say, hastens to the Logos with
   greater speed) than the iron towards the magnet.

   And that these things, he says, are so, and that all things that have
   been commingled are separated in their proper places, learn. There is
   among the Persians in a city Ampa, [556] near the river Tigris, a well;
   and near the well, at the top, has been constructed a certain
   reservoir, supplied with three outlets; and when one pumps from this
   well, and draws off some of its contents in a vessel, what is thus
   pumped out of the well, whatever it is at all, he pours into the
   reservoir hard by. And when what is thus infused reaches the outlets,
   and when what is taken up (out of each outlet) in a single vessel is
   examined, a separation is observed to have taken place.  And in the
   first of the outlets is exhibited a concretion of salt, and in the
   second of asphalt, and in the third of oil; and the oil is black, just
   as, he says, Herodotus [557] also narrates, and it yields a heavy
   smell, and the Persians call this "rhadinace." The similitude of the
   well is, say the Sethians, more sufficient for the demonstration of
   their proposition than all the statements that have been previously
   made.
     

   [552] hudor memigmenon oino diakrinei:  Miller's text is hudor
   memigmenon ainodia krene, which is obviously corrupt. His emendation of
   the passage may be translated thus: "And now some one observes water
   from a wayside fountain, mixed, so they say; and even though all things
   be intermingled, a separation is effected."

   [553] Matt. x. 34.

   [554] kentro. In other passages the word kerkis is used, i.e., the
   backbone.

   [555] Or, "power."

   [556] Or, "Ama."

   [557] Herodotus, vi. 119.
     

   Chapter XVII.--The Sethian Doctrines to Be Learned from the "Paraphrase
   of Seth."

   The opinion of the Sethians appears to us to have been sufficiently
   elucidated. If, however, any one is desirous of learning the entire
   doctrine according to them, let him read a book inscribed Paraphrase of
   Seth; for all their secret tenets he will find deposited there. But
   since we have explained the opinions entertained by the Sethians, let
   us see also what are the doctrines advanced by Justinus.
     

   Chapter XVIII.--The System of Justinus Antiscriptural and Essentially
   Pagan.

   Justinus [558] was entirely opposed to the teaching of the holy
   Scriptures, and moreover to the written or oral teaching of the blessed
   evangelists, according as the Logos was accustomed to instruct His
   disciples, saying, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles;" [559] and
   this signifies that they should not attend to the futile doctrine of
   the Gentiles. This (heretic) endeavours to lead on his hearers into an
   acknowledgment of prodigies detailed by the Gentiles, and of doctrines
   inculcated by them.  And he narrates, word for word, legendary accounts
   prevalent among the Greeks, and does not previously teach or deliver
   his perfect mystery, unless he has bound his dupe by an oath. Then he
   brings forward (these) fables for the purpose of persuasion, in order
   that they who are conversant with the incalculable trifling of these
   books may have some consolation in the details of these legends. Thus
   it happens as when in like manner one making a long journey deems it
   expedient, on having fallen in with an inn, to take repose. And so it
   is that, when once more they are induced to turn towards studying the
   diffuse doctrine of these lectures, they may not abhor them while they,
   undergoing instruction unnecessarily prolix, rush stupified into the
   transgression devised by (Justinus); and previously he binds his
   followers with horrible oaths, neither to publish nor abjure these
   doctrines, and forces upon them an acknowledgment (of their truth). And
   in this manner he delivers the mysteries impiously discovered by
   himself, partly, according to the statements previously made, availing
   himself of the Hellenic legends, and partly of those pretended books
   which, to some extent, bear a resemblance to the foresaid heresies. For
   all, forced together by one spirit, are drawn into one profound abyss
   of pollution, inculcating the same tenets, and detailing the same
   legends, each after a different method. All those, however, style
   themselves Gnostics in this peculiar sense, that they alone themselves
   have imbibed the marvellous knowledge of the Perfect and Good (Being).
     

   [558] What Hippolytus here states respecting Justinus is quite new. No
   mention occurs of this heretic in ecclesiastical history. It is
   evident, however, that, like Simon Magus, he was contemporary with St.
   Peter and St. Paul. Justinus, however, and the Ophitic sect to which he
   belonged, are assigned by Hippolytus and Irenæus a prior position as
   regards the order of their appearance to the system of Simon, or its
   offshoot Valentinianism. The Ophites engrafted Phrygian Judaism, and
   the Valentinians Gentilism, upon Christianity; the former not rejecting
   the speculations and mysteries of Asiatic paganism, and the latter
   availing themselves of the cabalistic corruptions of Judaism. The
   Judaistic element soon became prominent in successive phases of
   Valentinianism, which produced a fusion of the sects of the old
   Gnostics and of Simon. Hippolytus, however, now places the Ophitic sect
   before us prior to its amalgamation with Valentinianism. Here, for the
   first time, we have an authentic delineation of the primitive Ophites.
   This is of great value. [See Irenæus, vol. i., this series, p. 354;
   also Bunsen (on Baur), vol. i. p. 42.]

   [559] Matt. x. 5.
     

   Chapter XIX.--The Justinian Heresy Unfolded in the "Book of Baruch."

   But swear, says Justinus, if you wish to know "what eye hath not seen,
   and ear hath not heard, and the things which have not entered into the
   heart;" [560] that is, if you wish to know Him who is good above all,
   Him who is more exalted, (swear) that you will preserve the secrets (of
   the Justinian) discipline, as intended to be kept silent. For also our
   Father, on beholding the Good One, and on being initiated with Him,
   preserved the mysteries respecting which silence is enjoined, and
   sware, as it has been written, "The Lord sware, and will not repent."
   [561] Having, then, in this way set the seal to these tenets, he seeks
   to inveigle (his followers) with more legends, (which are detailed)
   through a greater number of books; and so he conducts (his readers) to
   the Good One, consummating the initiated (by admitting them into) the
   unspeakable Mysteries. [562] In order, however, that we may not wade
   through more of their volumes, we shall illustrate the ineffable
   Mysteries (of Justinus) from one book of his, inasmuch as, according to
   his supposition, it is (a work) of high repute. Now this volume is
   inscribed Baruch; and one fabulous account out of many which is
   explained by (Justinus) in this (volume), we shall point out, inasmuch
   as it is to be found in Herodotus. But after imparting a different
   shape to this (account), he explains it to his pupils as if it were
   something novel, being under the impression that the entire arrangement
   of his doctrine (springs) out of it.
     

   [560] Isa. lxiv. 4; 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [561] Ps. cx. 4; Heb. vii. 21.

   [562] Or, "the rest of the Mysteries."
     

   Chapter XX.--The Cosmogony of Justinus an Allegorical Explanation of
   Herodotus' Legend of Hercules.

   Herodotus, [563] then, asserts that Hercules, when driving the oxen of
   Geryon from Erytheia, [564] came into Scythia, and that, being wearied
   with travelling, he retired into some desert spot and slept for a short
   time. But while he slumbered his horse disappeared, seated on which he
   had performed his lengthened journey. On being aroused from repose, he,
   however, instituted a diligent search through the desert, endeavouring
   to discover his horse. And though he is unsuccessful in his search
   after the horse, he yet finds in the desert a certain damsel, half of
   whose form was that of woman, and proceeded to question her if she had
   seen the horse anywhere. The girl, however, replies that she had seen
   (the animal), but that she would not show him unless Hercules
   previously would come along with her for the purpose of sexual
   intercourse. Now Herodotus informs us that her upper parts as far as
   the groin were those of a virgin, but that everything below the body
   after the groin presented some horrible appearance of a snake. In
   anxiety, however, for the discovery of his horse, Hercules complies
   with the monster's request; for he knew her (carnally), and made her
   pregnant. And he foretold, after coition, that she had by him in her
   womb three children at the same time, who were destined to become
   illustrious. And he ordered that she, on bringing forth, should impose
   on the children as soon as born the following names: Agathyrsus,
   Gelonus, and Scytha. And as the reward of this (favour) receiving his
   horse from the beast-like damsel, he went on his way, taking with him
   the cattle also. But after these (details), Herodotus has a protracted
   account; adieu, however, to it for the present. [565] But what the
   opinions are of Justinus, who transfers this legend into (his account
   of) the generation of the universe, we shall explain.
     

   [563] Herodotus, iv. 8-10.

   [564] Erytheia (Eretheia) was the island which Geryon inhabited.
   Miller's text has 'Eruthas (i.e., sc. Thalasses), "the Red Sea." This,
   however, is a mistake.

   [565] Some read ton noun, which has been properly altered into to nun,
   as translated above.
     

   Chapter XXI.--Justinus' Triad of Principles; His Angelography Founded
   on This Triad; His Explanation of the Birth, Life, and Death of Our
   Lord.

   This (heresiarch) makes the following statement. There are three
   unbegotten principles of the universe, two male (and) one female. Of
   the male (principles), however, a certain one, is denominated good, and
   it alone is called after this manner, and possesses a power of
   prescience concerning the universe. But the other is father [566] of
   all begotten things, devoid of prescience, [567] and invisible. And the
   female (principle) is devoid of prescience, passionate, two-minded,
   [568] two-bodied, in every respect answering (the description of) the
   girl in the legend of Herodotus, as far as the groin a virgin, and (in)
   the parts below (resembling) a snake, as Justinus says. But this girl
   is styled Edem and Israel. And these principles of the universe are, he
   says, roots and fountains from which existing things have been
   produced, but that there was not anything else. The Father, then, who
   is devoid of prescience, beholding that half-woman Edem, passed into a
   concupiscent desire for her. But this Father, he says, is called
   Elohim. Not less did Edem also long for Elohim, and the mutual passion
   brought them together into the one nuptial couch of love. [569] And
   from such an intercourse the Father generates out of Edem unto himself
   twelve angels. And the names of the angels begotten by the Father are
   these: Michaël, Amen, [570] Baruch, Gabriel, Esaddæus....And of the
   maternal angels which Edem brought forth, the names in like manner have
   been subjoined, and they are as follows: Babel, [571] Achamoth, Naas,
   Bel, Belias, Satan, Saël, Adonæus, Leviathan, [572] Pharao, Carcamenos,
   (and) Lathen.

   Of these twenty-four angels the paternal ones are associated with the
   Father, and do all things according to His will; and the maternal
   (angels are associated with) Edem the Mother.  And the multitude of all
   these angels together is Paradise, he says, concerning which Moses
   speaks: "God planted a garden in Eden towards the east," [573] that is,
   towards the face of Edem, that Edem might behold the garden--that is,
   the angels--continually. Allegorically the angels are styled trees of
   this garden, and the tree of life is the third of the paternal
   angels--Baruch. And the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is the
   third of the maternal angels--Naas. For so, [574] says (Justinus), one
   ought to interpret the words of Moses, observing, "Moses said these
   things disguisedly, from the fact that all do not attain the truth."
   And, he says, Paradise being formed from the conjugal joy of Elohim and
   Edem, the angels of Elohim receiving from the most beauteous earth,
   that is, not from the portion of Edem resembling a monster, but from
   the parts above the groin of human shape, and gentle--in aspect,--make
   man out of the earth. But out of the parts resembling a monster are
   produced wild beasts, and the rest of the animal creation. They made
   man, therefore, as a symbol of the unity and love (subsisting) between
   them; and they depute their own powers unto him, Edem the soul, but
   Elohim the spirit. And the man Adam is produced as some actual seal and
   memento of love, and as an everlasting emblem of the marriage of Edem
   and Elohim. And in like manner also Eve was produced, he says, as Moses
   has described, an image and emblem (as well as) a seal, to be preserved
   for ever, of Edem. And in like manner also a soul was deposited in
   Eve,--an image--from Edem, but a spirit from Elohim. And there were
   given to them commandments, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish
   the earth," [575] that is, Edem; for so he wishes that it had been
   written. For the entire of the power belonging unto herself, Edem
   conferred upon Elohim as a sort of nuptial dowry. Whence, he says, from
   imitation of that primary marriage up to this day, women bring a dowry
   to their husbands, complying with a certain divine and paternal law
   that came into existence on the part of Edem towards Elohim.

   And when all things were created as has been described by Moses--both
   heaven and earth, and the things therein [576] --the twelve angels of
   the Mother were divided into four principles, and each fourth part of
   them is called a river--Phison, and Gehon, and Tigris, and Euphrates,
   as, he says, Moses states. These twelve angels, being mutually
   connected, go about into four parts, and manage the world, holding from
   Edem a sort of viceregal [577] authority over the world. But they do
   not always continue in the same places, but move around as if in a
   circular dance, changing place after place, and at set times and
   intervals retiring to the localities subject to themselves. And when
   Phison holds sway over places, famine, distress, and affliction prevail
   in that part of the earth, for the battalion of these angels is
   niggardly. In like manner also there belong to each part of the four,
   according to the power and nature of each, evil times and hosts of
   diseases. And continually, according to the dominion [578] of each
   fourth part, this stream of evil, just (like a current) of rivers,
   careers, according to the will of Edem, uninterruptedly around the
   world. And from some cause of this description has arisen the necessity
   of evil.

   When Elohim had prepared and created the world as a result from joint
   pleasure, He wished to ascend up to the elevated parts of heaven, and
   to see that not anything of what pertained to the creation laboured
   under deficiency. And He took His Own angels with Him, for His nature
   was to mount aloft, leaving Edem below: [579] for inasmuch as she was
   earth, she was not disposed to follow upward her spouse. Elohim, then,
   coming to the highest part of heaven above, and beholding a light
   superior to that which He Himself had created, exclaimed, "Open me the
   gates, that entering in I may acknowledge the Lord; for I considered
   Myself to be Lord." [580] A voice was returned to Him from the light,
   saying, "This is the gate of the Lord: through this the righteous enter
   in." [581] And immediately the gate was opened, and the Father, without
   the angels, entered, (advancing) towards the Good One, and beheld "what
   eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and what hath not entered
   into the heart of man to (conceive)." [582] Then the Good One says to
   him, "Sit thou on my right hand." [583] And the Father says to the Good
   One, "Permit me, Lord, to overturn the world which I have made, for my
   spirit is bound to men. [584] And I wish to receive it back (from
   them." Then the Good One replies to him, "No evil canst thou do while
   thou art with me, for both thou and Edem made the world as a result of
   conjugal joy. Permit Edem, then, to hold possession of the world as
   long as she wishes; but do you remain with me." Then Edem, knowing that
   she had been deserted by Elohim, was seized with grief, and placed
   beside herself her own angels. And she adorned herself after a comely
   fashion, if by any means Elohim, passing into concupiscent desire,
   might descend (from heaven) to her.

   When, however, Elohim, overpowered by the Good One, no longer descended
   to Edem, Edem commanded Babel, which is Venus, to cause adulteries and
   dissolutions of marriages among men. (And she adopted this expedient)
   in order that, as she had been divorced from Elohim, so also the spirit
   of Elohim, which is in men, being wrong with sorrow, might be punished
   by such separations, and might undergo precisely the sufferings which
   (were being endured by) the deserted Edem. And Edem gives great power
   to her third angel, Naas, that by every species of punishment she might
   chasten the spirit of Elohim which is in men, in order that Elohim,
   through the spirit, might be punished for having deserted his spouse,
   in violation of the agreements entered into between them. Elohim the
   father, seeing these things, sends forth Baruch, the third angel among
   his own, to succour the spirit that is in all men. [585] Baruch then
   coming, stood in the midst of the angels of Edem, that is, in the midst
   of paradise--for paradise is the angels, in the midst of whom he
   stood,--and issued to the man the following injunction:  "Of every tree
   that is in paradise thou mayest freely eat, but thou mayest not eat of
   the tree of the knowledge of good and evil," [586] which is Naas. Now
   the meaning is, that he should obey the rest of the eleven angels of
   Edem, for the eleven possess passions, but are not guilty of
   transgression. Naas, however, has committed sin, for he went in unto
   Eve, deceiving her, and debauched her; and (such an act as) this is a
   violation of law. He, however, likewise went in unto Adam, and had
   unnatural intercourse with him; and this is itself also a piece of
   turpitude, whence have arisen adultery and sodomy.

   Henceforward vice and virtue were prevalent among men, arising from a
   single source--that of the Father. For the Father having ascended to
   the Good One, points out from time to time the way to those desirous of
   ascending (to him likewise). After having, however, departed from Edem,
   he caused an originating principle of evil for the spirit of the Father
   that is in men. [587] Baruch therefore was despatched to Moses, and
   through him spoke to the children of Israel, that they might be
   converted unto the Good One. But the third angel (Naas), by the soul
   which came from Edem upon Moses, as also upon all men, obscured the
   precepts of Baruch, and caused his own peculiar injunctions to be
   hearkened unto. For this reason the soul is arrayed against the spirit,
   and the spirit against the soul. [588] For the soul is Edem, but the
   spirit Elohim, and each of these exists in all men, both females and
   males. Again, after these (occurrences), Baruch was sent to the
   Prophets, that through the Prophets the spirit that dwelleth in men
   [589] might hear (words of warning), and might avoid Edem and the
   wicked fiction, just as the Father had fled from Elohim. In like manner
   also--by the prophets [590] --Naas, by a similar device, through the
   soul [591] that dwells in man, along with the spirit of the Father,
   enticed away the prophets, and all (of them) were allured after him,
   and did not follow the words of Baruch, which Elohim enjoined.

   Ultimately Elohim selected Hercules, an uncircumcised prophet, and sent
   him to quell the twelve angels of Edem, and release the Father from the
   twelve angels, those wicked ones of the creation. These are the twelve
   conflicts of Hercules which Hercules underwent, in order, from first to
   last, viz., Lion, and Hydra, and Boar, and the others successively. For
   they say that these are the names (of them) among the Gentiles, and
   they have been derived with altered denominations from the energy of
   the maternal angels. When he seemed to have vanquished his antagonists,
   Omphale--now she is Babel or Venus--clings to him and entices away
   Hercules, and divests him of his power, viz., the commands of Baruch
   which Elohim issued. And in place (of this power, Babel) envelopes him
   in her own peculiar robe, that is, in the power of Edem, who is the
   power below; and in this way the prophecy of Hercules remained
   unfulfilled, and his works.

   Finally, however, in the days of Herod the king, Baruch is despatched,
   being sent down once more by Elohim; and coming to Nazareth, he found
   Jesus, son of Joseph and Mary, a child of twelve years, feeding sheep.
   And he announces to him all things from the beginning, whatsoever had
   been done by Edem and Elohim, and whatsoever would be likely to take
   place hereafter, and spoke the following words: "All the prophets
   anterior to you have been enticed. Put forth an effort, therefore,
   Jesus, Son of man, not to be allured, but preach this word unto men,
   and carry back tidings to them of things pertaining to the Father, and
   things pertaining to the Good One, and ascend to the Good One, and sit
   there with Elohim, Father of us all." And Jesus was obedient unto the
   angel, saying that, "I shall do all things, Lord," and proceeded to
   preach. Naas therefore wished to entice this one also.  (Jesus,
   however, was not disposed to listen to his overtures [592] ), for he
   remained faithful to Baruch.  Therefore Naas, being inflamed with anger
   because he was not able to seduce him, caused him to be crucified. He,
   however, leaving the body of Edem on the (accursed) tree, ascended to
   the Good One; saying, however, to Edem, "Woman, thou retainest thy
   son," [593] that is, the natural and the earthly man. But (Jesus)
   himself commending his spirit into the hands of the Father, ascended to
   the Good One. Now the Good One is Priapus, (and) he it is who
   antecedently caused the production of everything that exists. On this
   account he is styled Priapus, because he previously fashioned all
   things (according to his own design). For this reason, he says, in
   every temple is placed his statue, which is revered by every creature;
   and (there are images of him) in the highways, carrying over his head
   ripened fruits, that is, the produce of the creation, of which he is
   the cause, having in the first instance formed, (according to His own
   design), the creation, when as yet it had no existence. When,
   therefore, he says, you hear men asserting that the swan went in unto
   Leda, and begat a child from her, (learn that) the swan is Elohim, and
   Leda Edem. And when people allege that an eagle went in unto Ganymede,
   (know that) the eagle is Naas, and Ganymede Adam. And when they assert
   that gold (in a shower) went in unto Danaë and begat a child from her,
   (recollect that) the gold is Elohim, and Danaë is Edem. And similarly,
   in the same manner adducing all accounts of this description, which
   correspond with (the nature of) legends, they pursue the work of
   instruction. When, therefore, the prophet says, "Hearken, O heaven, and
   give ear, O earth; the Lord hath spoken," he means by heaven,
   (Justinus) says, the spirit which is in man from Elohim; and by earth,
   the soul which is in man along with the spirit; and by Lord, Baruch;
   and by Israel, Edem, for Israel as well as Edem is called the spouse of
   Elohim. "Israel," he says, "did not know me (Elohim); for had he known
   me, that I am with the Good One, he would not have punished through
   paternal ignorance the spirit which is in men."
     

   [566] Or, "mother."

   [567] kai agnostos, "and unknown," is added in Cruice's and
   Schneidewin's text, as this word occurs in Hippolytus' epitome of
   Justinus' heresy in book x. of The Refutation.

   [568] dignomos:  some read agnomon, i.e., devoid of judgment.

   [569] eunen: some read eunoian, i.e., goodwill, but this seems
   pleonastic where philias precedes.

   [570] See Rev. iii. 14. [Bunsen, i. 39.]

   [571] Or, "Babelachamos," or "Babel, Achamos."

   [572] Or, "Kaviathan."

   [573] Gen. ii. 8.

   [574] Or, "this one."

   [575] Gen. i. 28.

   [576] en aute: some read en arche, i.e., in the beginning.

   [577] satrapiken.  The common reading astrapiken is obviously corrupt.

   [578] Or, "mixture."

   [579] kato:  some read katoge, i.e., katogaios, earthly; some
   katopheres, with a downward tendency.

   [580] Ps. cxvii. 19.

   [581] Ps. cxviii. 20.

   [582] Isa. lxiv. 4; 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [583] Ps. cx. 1.

   [584] Or, "the heavens."

   [585] anthropois pasin.  'Elthon. Some read: anthropois.  Palin elthon.

   [586] Gen. ii. 16, 17.

   [587] Or, "in heaven."

   [588] Gal. v. 17.

   [589] Or, "in heaven."

   [590] These words are superfluous here, and are repeated from the
   preceding sentence by mistake.

   [591] psuches: some read euches, i.e., prayer.

   [592] Miller conjectures that the parenthetical words should be added
   to the text.

   [593] John xix. 26.
     

   Chapter XXII.--Oath Used by the Justinian Heretics; The Book of Baruch;
   The Repertory of Their System.

   Hence [594] also, in the first book inscribed "Baruch," has been
   written the oath which they compel those to swear who are about to hear
   these mysteries, and be initiated with the Good One. [595] And this
   oath, (Justinus) says, our Father Elohim sware when He was beside the
   Good One, and having sworn He did not repent (of the oath), respecting
   which, he says, it has been written, "The Lord sware, and will not
   repent." [596] Now the oath is couched in these [597] terms:  "I swear
   by that Good One who is above all, to guard these mysteries, and to
   divulge them to no one, and not to relapse from the Good One to the
   creature." And when he has sworn this oath, he goes on to the Good One,
   and beholds "whatever things eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard,
   and which have not entered into the heart of man;" [598] and he drinks
   from life-giving water, which is to them, as they suppose, a bath,
   [599] a fountain of life-giving, bubbling water. [600]   For there has
   been a separation made between water and water; and there is water,
   that below the firmament of the wicked creation, in which earthly and
   animal men are washed; and there is life-giving water, (that) above the
   firmament, [601] of the Good One, in which spiritual (and) living men
   are washed; and in this Elohim washed Himself. and having washed did
   not repent. And when, he says, the prophet affirms, "Take unto yourself
   a wife of whoredom, since the earth has abandoned itself to
   fornication, (departing) from (following) after the Lord;" [602] that
   is, Edem (departs) from Elohim.  (Now) in these words, he says, the
   prophet clearly declares the entire mystery, and is not hearkened unto
   by reason of the wicked machinations of Naas. According to that same
   manner, they deliver other prophetical passages in a similar spirit of
   interpretation throughout numerous books. The volume, however,
   inscribed "Baruch," is pre-eminently to them the one in which the
   reader [603] will ascertain the entire explanation of their legendary
   system (to be contained).  Beloved, though I have encountered many
   heresies, yet with no wicked (heresiarch) worse than this (Justinus)
   has it been my lot to meet. But, in truth, (the followers of Justinus)
   ought to imitate [604] the example of his Hercules, and to cleanse, as
   the saying is, the cattle-shed of Augias, or rather I should say, a
   ditch, [605] into which, as soon as the adherents of this (heresiarch)
   have fallen, they can never be cleansed; nay, they will not be able
   even to raise their heads.
     

   [594] enteuthen: this word stands at the end of the last chapter in the
   text of Miller, who suspects that there is here some hiatus. In this
   opinion the Abbe Cruice concurs. Schneidewin, however, transfers
   enteuthen to the beginning of this chapter as above.

   [595] para to agatho: or rather, we should expect, into a knowledge of
   the Good One.

   [596] Ps. cx. 4; Heb. vii. 21.

   [597] ouutos: some read houtos.

   [598] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [599] loutron: the ecclesiastical use of this word makes it stand for
   baptism.

   [600] John iv. 14.

   [601] Gen. i. 6, 7.

   [602] Hos. i. 2.

   [603] entuchon: some read eutuchon, i.e., one who is fortunate enough
   to meet with the book.

   [604] Literally "ought, according to his Hercules, by imitating," etc.

   [605] amaran. This word means a trench or channel in a field, for the
   purpose either of irrigation or drainage. Schneidewin and Cruice render
   it by the Latin Sentinam, an expression applied, for example, to bilge
   water.
     

   Chapter XXIII.--Subsequent Heresies Deducible from the System of
   Justinus.

   Since, then, we have explained the attempts (at a system) of the
   pseudo-gnostic Justinus, it appears likewise expedient in the following
   books to elucidate the opinions put forward in heresies following (in
   the way of consequence upon the doctrines of Justinus), and to leave
   not a single one of these (speculators) unrefuted. Our refutation will
   be accomplished by adducing the assertions made by them; such (at least
   of their statements) as are sufficient for making a public example (of
   these heretics). (And we shall attain our purpose), even though there
   should only be condemned [606] the secret and ineffable (mysteries)
   practised amongst them, into which, silly mortals that they are,
   scarcely (even) with considerable labour are they initiated. Let us
   then see what also Simon affirms.
     

   [606] ekretheie, i.e., ekritheie: some read ekkritheie, which might be
   rendered, "even though, (for the purpose of holding these heretics up
   to public shame,) there should be made a selection only," etc.