Book VI.

   ------------------------

   Contents.

   The following are the contents of the sixth book of the Refutation of
   all Heresies:--

   What the opinions are that are attempted (to be established) by Simon,
   and that his doctrine derives its force from the (lucubrations) of
   magicians and poets.

   What are the opinions propounded by Valentinus, and that his system is
   not constructed out of the Scriptures, but out of the Platonic and
   Pythagorean tenets.

   And what are the opinions of Secundus, and Ptolemæus, and Heracleon, as
   persons also who themselves advanced the same doctrines as the
   philosophers among the Greeks, but enunciated them in different
   phraseology.

   And what are the suppositions put forward by Marcus and Colarbasus, and
   that some of them devoted their attention to magical arts and the
   Pythagorean numbers.
     

   Chapter I. [607] --The Ophites the Progenitors of Subsequent Heresies.

   Whatever opinions, then, were entertained by those who derived the
   first principles (of their doctrine) from the serpent, and in process
   of time [608] deliberately [609] brought forward into public notice
   their tenets, we have explained in the book preceding this, (and) which
   is the fifth of the Refutation of Heresies. But now also I shall not be
   silent as regards the opinions of (heresiarchs) who follow these
   (Ophites in succession); nay, not one (speculation) will I leave
   unrefuted, if it is possible to remember all (their tenets), and the
   secret orgies of these (heretics) which one may fairly style
   orgies,--for they who propagate such audacious opinions are not far
   distant from the anger (of God),--that I may avail myself of the
   assistance of etymology.
     

   [607] [Presuming that all who are disposed to study this work will turn
   to Dr. Bunsen's first volume (Hippol.), I have not thought it wise to
   load these pages with references to his interesting reviewal.]

   [608] kata teleiosin ton chronon.  This is Bunsen's emendation. The
   textual reading is meiosin.

   [609] hekousios: Bunsen suggests anosios, i.e., profanely.
     

   Chapter II.--Simon Magus.

   It seems, then, expedient likewise to explain now the opinions of
   Simon, [610] a native of Gitta, a village of Samaria; and we shall also
   prove that his successors, taking a starting-point from him, have
   endeavoured (to establish) similar opinions under a change of name.
   This Simon being an adept in sorceries, both making a mockery of many,
   partly according to the art of Thrasymedes, in the manner in which we
   have explained above, [611] and partly also by the assistance of demons
   perpetrating his villany, attempted to deify himself. (But) the man was
   a (mere) cheat, and full of folly, and the Apostles reproved him in the
   Acts. [612] With much greater wisdom and moderation than Simon, did
   Apsethus the Libyan, inflamed with a similar wish, endeavour to have
   himself considered a god in Libya. And inasmuch as his legendary system
   does not present any wide divergence from the inordinate desire of that
   silly Simon, it seems expedient to furnish an explanation of it, as one
   worthy of the attempt made by this man.
     

   [610] See Irenæus, Hæres., i. 19, 20; Tertullian, Præscript., c. xlvi.;
   Epiphanius, Hæres., xxi.; Theodoret, Hæret. Fab., i. 1; St. Augustine,
   De Hæres., 1. See the apology of Justin Martyr (vol. i., this series,
   p. 171), who says, "There was a Samaritan, Simon, a native of the
   village called Gitto, who, in the reign of Claudius Cæsar, and in your
   royal city of Rome, did mighty acts of magic, by virtue of the art of
   the devils operating in him." Simon's history and opinions are treated
   of largely in the Recognitions of Clement. See vol. iii. of the
   Edinburgh series, pp. 156-271; [vol. viii. of this series].

   [611] In book iv. of The Refutation.

   [612] Acts viii. 9-24.
     

   Chapter III.--Story of Apsethus the Libyan.

   Apsethus [613] the Libyan inordinately longed to become a god; but
   when, after repeated intrigues, he altogether failed to accomplish his
   desire, he nevertheless wished to appear to have become a god; and he
   did at all events appear, as time wore on, to have in reality become a
   god. For the foolish Libyans were accustomed to sacrifice unto him as
   to some divine power, supposing that they were yielding credence to a
   voice that came down from above, from heaven. For, collecting into one
   and the same cage a great number of birds,--parrots,--he shut them up.
   Now there are very many parrots throughout Libya, and very distinctly
   these imitate the human voice. This man, having for a time nourished
   the birds, was in the habit of teaching them to say, "Apsethus is a
   god." After, however, the birds had practised this for a long period,
   and were accustomed to the utterance of that which he thought, when
   said, would make it supposed that Apsethus was a god, then, opening the
   habitation (of the birds), he let forth the parrots, each in a
   different direction. While the birds, however, were on the wing, their
   sound went out into all Libya, and the expressions of these reached as
   far as the Hellenic country. And thus the Libyans, being astonished at
   the voice of the birds, and not perceiving the knavery perpetrated by
   Apsethus, held Apsethus to be a god. Some one, however, of the Greeks,
   by accurate examination, perceiving the trick of the supposed god, by
   means of those same parrots not only refutes, but also utterly
   destroys, that boastful and tiresome fellow. Now the Greek, by
   confining many of the parrots, taught them anew to say, "Apsethus,
   having caged us, compelled us to say, Apsethus is a god." But having
   heard of the recantation of the parrots, the Libyans, coming together,
   all unanimously decided on burning Apsethus.
     

   [613] Miller refers us to Apostolius' Proverb., s.v. psaphon.
   Schneidewin remarks that Maximus Tyrius relates almost a similar story
   concerning one Psapho, a Libyan, in his Dissert. (xxxv.), and that
   Apostolius extracted this account and inserted it in his Cent., xviii.
   p. 730, ed. Leutsch, mentioning at the same time a similar narrative
   from Ælian's Hist., xiv. 30. See Justin., xxi. 4, and Pliny, Nat.
   Hist., viii. 16.
     

   Chapter IV.--Simon's Forced Interpretation of Scripture; Plagiarizes
   from Heraclitus and Aristotle; Simon's System of Sensible and
   Intelligible Existences.

   In this way we must think concerning Simon the magician, so that we may
   compare him unto the Libyan, far sooner than unto Him who, though made
   man, [614] was in reality God. If, however, the assertion of this
   likeness is in itself accurate, and the sorcerer was the subject of a
   passion similar to Apsethus, let us endeavour to teach anew the parrots
   of Simon, that Christ, who stood, stands, and will stand, (that is,
   was, is, and is to come,) was not Simon. But (Jesus) was man, offspring
   of the seed of a woman, born of blood and the will of the flesh, as
   also the rest (of humanity). And that these things are so, we shall
   easily prove as the discussion proceeds.

   Now Simon, both foolishly and knavishly paraphrasing the law of Moses,
   makes his statements (in the manner following): For when Moses asserts
   that "God is a burning and consuming fire," [615] taking what is said
   by Moses not in its correct sense, he affirms that fire is the
   originating principle of the universe. (But Simon) does not consider
   what the statement is which is made, namely, that it is not that God is
   a fire, but a burning and consuming fire, (thereby) not only putting a
   violent sense upon the actual law of Moses, but even plagiarizing from
   Heraclitus the Obscure. And Simon denominates the originating principle
   of the universe an indefinite power, expressing himself thus: "This is
   the treatise of a revelation of (the) voice and name (recognisable) by
   means of intellectual apprehension of the Great Indefinite Power.
   Wherefore it will be sealed, (and) kept secret, (and) hid, (and) will
   repose in the habitation, at the foundation of which lies the root of
   all things." And he asserts that this man who is born of blood is (the
   aforesaid) habitation, and that in him resides an indefinite power,
   which he affirms to be the root of the universe.

   Now the indefinite power which is fire, constitutes, according to
   Simon, not any uncompounded (essence, in conformity with the opinion of
   those who) assert that the four elements are simple, and who have
   (therefore) likewise imagined that fire, (which is one of the four,) is
   simple. But (this is far from being the case): for there is, (he
   maintains,) a certain twofold nature of fire; [616] and of this twofold
   (nature) he denominates one part a something secret, and another a
   something manifest, and that the secret are hidden in the manifest
   portions of the fire, and that the manifest portions of the fire derive
   their being from its secret (portions). This, however, is what
   Aristotle denominates by (the expressions) "potentiality" and "energy,"
   or (what) Plato (styles) "intelligible" and "sensible." And the
   manifest portion of the fire comprises all things in itself, whatsoever
   any one might discern, or even whatever objects of the visible creation
   [617] he may happen to overlook. But the entire secret (portion of the
   fire) which one may discern is cognised by intellect, and evades the
   power of the senses; or one fails to observe it, from want of a
   capacity for that particular sort of perception. In general, however,
   inasmuch as all existing things fall under the categories, namely, of
   what are objects of Sense, and what are objects of Intellect, and as
   for the denomination of these (Simon) employs the terms secret and
   manifest; it may, (I say, in general,) be affirmed that the fire, (I
   mean) the super-celestial (fire), is a treasure, as it were a large
   tree, just such a one as in a dream was seen by Nabuchodonosor, [618]
   out of which all flesh is nourished. And the manifest portion of the
   fire he regards as the stem, the branches, the leaves, (and) the
   external rind which overlaps them. All these (appendages), he says, of
   the Great Tree being kindled, are made to disappear by reason of the
   blaze of the all-devouring fire. The fruit, however, of the tree, when
   it is fully grown, and has received its own form, is deposited in a
   granary, not (flung) into the fire. For, he says, the fruit has been
   produced for the purpose of being laid in the storehouse, whereas the
   chaff that it may be delivered over to the fire. [619] (Now the chaff)
   is stem, (and is) generated not for its own sake, but for that of the
   fruit.
     

   [614] The text here is corrupt. The above is Miller's emendation.
   Cruice's reading may thus be rendered: "So that far sooner we may
   compare him unto the Libyan, who was a mere man, and not the true God."

   [615] Deut. iv. 24.

   [616] The Abbe Cruice considers that Theodoret has made use of this
   passage. (See Hæret. Fab., i. 1.)

   [617] Or, ton aoraton, the invisible one.

   [618] Dan. iv. 10-12.

   [619] Matt. iii. 12; Luke iii. 17.
     

   Chapter V.--Simon Appeals to Scripture in Support of His System.

   And this, he says, is what has been written in Scripture: "For the
   vineyard of the Lord of Sabaoth is the house of Israel, and the man of
   Judah is His beloved plant." If, however, the man of Judah (is) the
   beloved plant, it has been proved, he says, that there is not any other
   tree but that man. But concerning the secretion and dissolution of this
   (tree), Scripture, he says, has spoken sufficiently. And as regards
   instruction for those who have been fashioned after the image (of him),
   that statement is enough which is made (in Scripture), that "all flesh
   is grass, and all the glory of flesh, as it were, a flower of grass.
   The grass withereth, and its flower falleth; but the word of the Lord
   abideth for ever." [620] The word of the Lord, he says, is that word
   which is produced in the mouth, and (is) a Logos, but nowhere else
   exists there a place of generation.
     

   [620] 1 Pet. i. 24.
     

   Chapter VI.--Simon's System Expounded in the Work, Great Announcement;
   Follows Empedocles.

   Now, to express myself briefly, inasmuch as the fire is of this
   description, according to Simon, and since all things are visible and
   invisible, (and) in like manner resonant and not resonant, numerable
   and not subjects of numeration; he denominates in the Great
   Announcement a perfect intelligible (entity), after such a mode, that
   each of those things which, existing indefinitely, may be infinitely
   comprehended, both speaks, and understands, and acts in such a manner
   as Empedocles [621] speaks of:--

   "For earth, indeed, by earth we see, and water by water,

   And air divine by air, and fire fierce by fire,

   And love by love, and also strife by gloomy strife."
     

   [621] Emped., ed. Karst. v. 324.
     

   Chapter VII.--Simon's System of a Threefold Emanation by Pairs.

   For, he says, he is in the habit of considering that all these portions
   of the fire, both visible and invisible, are possessed of perception
   and a share of intelligence. [622] The world, therefore, that which is
   generated, was produced from the unbegotten fire. It began, however, to
   exist, he says, according to the following manner. He who was begotten
   from the principle of that fire took six roots, and those primary ones,
   of the originating principle of generation.  And, he says that the
   roots were made from the fire in pairs, which roots he terms "Mind" and
   "Intelligence," "Voice" and "Name," "Ratiocination" and "Reflection."
   And that in these six roots resides simultaneously the entire
   indefinite power potentially, (however) not actually. And this
   indefinite power, he says, is he who stood, stands, and will stand.
   Wherefore, whensoever he may be made into an image, inasmuch as he
   exists in the six powers, he will exist (there) substantially,
   potentially, quantitively, (and) completely. (And he will be a power)
   one and the same with the unbegotten and indefinite power, and not
   labouring under any greater deficiency than that unbegotten and
   unalterable (and) indefinite power. If, however, he may continue only
   potentially in the six powers, and has not been formed into an image,
   he vanishes, he says, and is destroyed in such a way as the grammatical
   or geometrical capacity in man's soul. For when the capacity takes unto
   itself an art, a light of existent things is produced; but when (the
   capacity) does not take unto itself (an art), unskilfulness and
   ignorance are the results; and just as when (the power) was
   non-existent, it perishes along with the expiring man.
     

   [622] nomatos aisan: Miller has gnomen isen, which yields but little
   sense.
     

   Chapter VIII.--Further Progression of This Threefold Emanation;
   Co-Existence with the Double Triad of a Seventh Existence.

   And of those six powers, [623] and of the seventh which co-exists with
   them, the first pair, Mind and Intelligence, he calls Heaven and Earth.
   And that one of these, being of male sex, beholds from above and takes
   care of his partner, but that the earth receives below the rational
   fruits, akin to the earth, which are borne down from the heaven. On
   this account, he says, the Logos, frequently looking towards the things
   that are being generated from Mind and Intelligence, that is, from
   Heaven and Earth, exclaims, "Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth,
   because the Lord has spoken. I have brought forth children, and exalted
   them; and these have rejected me."  Now, he who utters these words, he
   says, is the seventh power--he who stood, stands, and will stand; for
   he himself is cause of those beauteous objects of creation which Moses
   commended, and said that they were very good. But Voice and Name (the
   second of the three pairs) are Sun and Moon; and Ratiocination and
   Reflection (the third of the three pairs) are Air and Water. And in all
   these is intermingled and blended, as I have declared, the great, the
   indefinite, the (self-) existing power.
     

   [623] These powers are thus arranged: 1. Mind and Intelligence: termed
   also,--1. Heaven and Earth. 2. Voice and Name: termed also,--2. Sun and
   Moon. 3. Ratiocination and Reflection:  termed also,--3. Air and Water.
     

   Chapter IX.--Simon's Interpretation of the Mosaic Hexaëmeron; His
   Allegorical Representation of Paradise.

   When, therefore, Moses has spoken of "the six days in which God made
   heaven and earth, and rested on the seventh from all His works," [624]
   Simon, in a manner already specified, giving (these and other passages
   of Scripture) a different application (from the one intended by the
   holy writers), deifies himself. When, therefore, (the followers of
   Simon) affirm that there are three days begotten before sun and moon,
   they speak enigmatically of Mind and Intelligence, that is, Heaven and
   Earth, and of the seventh power, (I mean) the indefinite one. For these
   three powers are produced antecedent to all the rest. But when they
   say, "He begot me prior to all the Ages," [625] such statements, he
   says, are alleged to hold good concerning the seventh power.  Now this
   seventh power, which was a power existing in the indefinite power,
   which was produced prior to all the Ages, this is, he says, the seventh
   power, respecting which Moses utters the following words:  "And the
   Spirit of God was wafted over [626] the water;" that is, says (the
   Simonian), the Spirit which contains all things in itself, and is an
   image of the indefinite power about which Simon speaks,--"an image from
   an incorruptible form, that alone reduces all things into order." For
   this power that is wafted over the water, being begotten, he says, from
   an incorruptible form alone, reduces all things into order. When,
   therefore, according to these (heretics), there ensued some such
   arrangement, and (one) similar (to it) of the world, the Deity, he
   says, proceeded to form man, taking clay from the earth. And He formed
   him not uncompounded, but twofold, according to (His own) image and
   likeness. [627] Now the image is the Spirit that is wafted over the
   water; and whosoever is not fashioned into a figure of this, will
   perish with the world, inasmuch as he continues only potentially, and
   does exist actually. This, he says, is what has been spoken, "that we
   should not be condemned with the world." [628] If one, however, be made
   into the figure of (the Spirit), and be generated from an indivisible
   point, as it has been written in the Announcement, (such a one, albeit)
   small, will become great. But what is great will continue unto infinite
   and unalterable duration, as being that which no longer is subject to
   the conditions of a generated entity.

   How then, he says, and in what manner, does God form man? In Paradise;
   for so it seems to him. Grant Paradise, he says, to be the womb; and
   that this is a true (assumption) the Scripture will teach, when it
   utters the words, "I am He who forms thee in thy mother's womb." [629]
   For this also he wishes to have been written so. Moses, he says,
   resorting to allegory, has declared Paradise to be the womb, if we
   ought to rely on his statement.  If, however, God forms man in his
   mother's womb--that is, in Paradise--as I have affirmed, let Paradise
   be the womb, and Edem the after-birth, [630] "a river flowing forth
   from Edem, for the purpose of irrigating Paradise," [631] (meaning by
   this) the navel. This navel, he says, is separated into four
   principles; for on either side of the navel are situated two arteries,
   channels of spirit, and two veins, channels of blood. But when, he
   says, the umbilical vessels [632] proceed forth from Edem, that is, the
   caul in which the foetus is enveloped grows into the (foetus) that is
   being formed in the vicinity of the epigastrium,--(now) all in common
   denominate this a navel,--these two veins through which the blood
   flows, and is conveyed from Edem, the after-birth, to what are styled
   the gates of the liver; (these veins, I say,) nourish the foetus. But
   the arteries which we have spoken of as being channels of spirit,
   embrace the bladder on both sides, around the pelvis, and connect it
   with the great artery, called the aorta, in the vicinity of the dorsal
   ridge. And in this way the spirit, making its way through the
   ventricles to the heart, produces a movement of the foetus.  For the
   infant that was formed in Paradise neither receives nourishment through
   the mouth, nor breathes through the nostrils: for as it lay in the
   midst of moisture, at its feet was death, if it attempted to breathe;
   for it would (thus) have been drawn away from moisture, and perished
   (accordingly). But (one may go further than this); for the entire
   (foetus) is bound tightly round by a covering styled the caul, and is
   nourished by a navel, and it receives through the (aorta), in the
   vicinity of the dorsal ridge, as I have stated, the substance of the
   spirit.
     

   [624] Gen. ii. 2.

   [625] Prov. viii. 22-24.

   [626] "Brooded over" (see Gen. i. 2).

   [627] Gen. ii. 7.

   [628] 1 Cor. xi. 32.

   [629] Jer. i. 5.

   [630] chorion (i.e., locality) is the reading in Miller, which Cruice
   ingeniously alters into chorion, the caul in which the foetus is
   enclosed, which is called the "after-birth."

   [631] Gen. ii. 10.

   [632] This rendering follows Cruice, who has succeeded in clearing away
   the obscurity of the passage as given in Miller.
     

   Chapter X.--Simon's Explanation of the First Two Books of Moses.

   The river, therefore, he says, which proceeds out of Edem is divided
   into four principles, four channels--that is, into four senses,
   belonging to the creature that is being born, viz., seeing, smelling,
   taste, and touch; for the child formed in Paradise has these senses
   only. This, he says, is the law which Moses appointed; and in reference
   to this very law, each of his books has been written, as the
   inscriptions evince. The first book is Genesis. The inscription of the
   book is, he says, sufficient for a knowledge of the universe. For this
   is (equivalent in meaning with) generation, (that is,) vision, into
   which one section of the river is divided. For the world was seen by
   the power of vision. Again, the inscription of the second book is
   Exodus. For what has been produced, passing through the Red Sea, must
   come into the wilderness,--now they say he calls the Red (Sea)
   blood,--and taste bitter water. For bitter, he says, is the water which
   is (drunk) after (crossing) the Red Sea; which (water) is a path to be
   trodden, that leads (us) to a knowledge in (this) life of (our)
   toilsome and bitter lot. Altered, however, by Moses--that is, by the
   Logos--that bitter (water) becomes sweet. And that this is so we may
   hear in common from all who express themselves according to the
   (sentiments of the) poets:--

   "Dark at the root, like milk, the flower,

   Gods call it Moly,' and hard for mortal men

   To dig, but power divine is boundless." [633]
     

   [633] Odyssey, x. 304 et seq. [See Butcher and Lang, p. 163.]
     

   Chapter XI.--Simon's Explanation of the Three Last Books of the
   Pentateuch.

   What is spoken by the Gentiles is sufficient for a knowledge of the
   universe to those who have ears (capable) of hearing. For whosoever, he
   says, has tasted this fruit, is not the only one that is changed by
   Circe into a beast; but also, employing the power of such a fruit, he
   forms anew and moulds afresh, and re-entices into that primary peculiar
   character of theirs, those that already have been altered into beasts.
   But a faithful man, and beloved by that sorceress, is, he says,
   discovered through that milk-like and divine fruit. In like manner, the
   third book is Leviticus, which is smelling, or respiration.  For the
   entire of that book is (an account) of sacrifices and offerings. Where,
   however, there is a sacrifice, a certain savour of the fragrance arises
   from the sacrifice through the incense-offerings; and in regard of this
   fragrance (the sense of) smelling is a test. Numbers, the fourth of the
   books, signifies taste, where the discourse is operative.  For, from
   the fact of its speaking all things, it is denominated by numerical
   arrangement. But Deuteronomy, he says, is written in reference to the
   (sense of) touch possessed by the child that is being formed. For as
   touch, by seizing the things that are seen by the other senses, sums
   them up and ratifies them, testing what is rough, or warm, or clammy,
   (or cold); so the fifth book of the law constitutes a summary of the
   four books preceding this.

   All things, therefore, he says, when unbegotten, are in us potentially,
   not actually, as the grammatical or geometrical (art). If, then, one
   receives proper instruction and teaching, and (where consequently) what
   is bitter will be altered into what is sweet,--that is, the spears into
   pruning-hooks, and the swords into plough-shares, [634] --there will
   not be chaff and wood begotten for fire, but mature fruit, fully
   formed, as I said, equal and similar to the unbegotten and indefinite
   power. If, however, a tree continues alone, not producing fruit fully
   formed, it is utterly destroyed. For somewhere near, he says, is the
   axe (which is laid) at the roots of the tree. Every tree, he says,
   which does not produce good fruit, is hewn down and cast into fire.
   [635]
     

   [634] Isa. ii. 4.

   [635] Matt. iii. 10; Luke iii. 9.
     

   Chapter XII.--Fire a Primal Principle, According to Simon.

   According to Simon, therefore, there exists that which is blessed and
   incorruptible in a latent condition in every one--(that is,)
   potentially, not actually; and that this is He who stood, stands, [636]
   and is to stand. [637] He has stood above in unbegotten power. He
   stands below, when in the stream of waters He was begotten in a
   likeness. He is to stand above, beside the blessed indefinite power, if
   He be fashioned into an image. For, he says, there are three who have
   stood; and except there were three Æons who have stood, the unbegotten
   one is not adorned. (Now the unbegotten one) is, according to them,
   wafted over the water, and is re-made, according to the similitude (of
   an eternal nature), a perfect celestial (being), in no (quality of)
   intelligence formed inferior to the unbegotten power: that is what they
   say--I and you, one; you, before me; I, that which is after you. This,
   he says, is one power divided above (and) below, generating itself,
   making itself grow, seeking itself, finding itself, being mother of
   itself, father of itself, sister of itself, spouse of itself, daughter
   of itself, son of itself, mother, father, a unit, being a root of the
   entire circle of existence.

   And that, he says, the originating principle of the generation of
   things begotten is from fire, he discerns after some such method as the
   following. Of all things, (i.e.) of whatsoever there is a generation,
   the beginning of the desire of the generation is from fire. Wherefore
   the desire after mutable generation is denominated "to be inflamed."
   For when the fire is one, it admits of two conversions. For, he says,
   blood in the man being both warm and yellow, is converted as a figured
   flame into seed; but in the woman this same blood is converted into
   milk. And the conversion of the male becomes generation, but the
   conversion of the female nourishment for the foetus. This, he says, is
   "the flaming sword, which turned to guard the way of the tree of life."
   [638] For the blood is converted into seed and milk, and this power
   becomes mother and father--father of those things that are in process
   of generation, and the augmentation of those things that are being
   nourished; (and this power is) without further want, (and)
   self-sufficient. And, he says, the tree of life is guarded, as we have
   stated, by the brandished flaming sword. And it is the seventh power,
   that which (is produced) from itself, (and) which contains all (powers,
   and) which reposes in the six powers. For if the flaming sword be not
   brandished, that good tree will be destroyed, and perish. If, however,
   these be converted into seed and milk, the principle that resides in
   these potentially, and is in possession of a proper position, in which
   is evolved a principle of souls, (such a principle,) beginning, as it
   were, from a very small spark, will be altogether magnified, and will
   increase and become a power indefinite (and) unalterable, (equal and
   similar) to an unalterable age, which no longer passes into the
   indefinite age.
     

   [636] In the Recognitions of Clement we have this passage:  "He (Simon)
   wishes himself to be believed to be an exalted power, which is above
   God the Creator, and to be thought to be the Christ, and to be called
   the standing one" (Ante-Nicene Library, ed. Edinburgh, vol. iii. p.
   196).

   [637] The expression stans (standing) was used by the scholastics as
   applicable to the divine nature. Interpreted in this manner, the words
   in the text would be equivalent with "which was, and is, and is to
   come" (Rev. i. 8). The Recognitions of Clement explain the term thus:
   "He (Simon) uses this name as implying that he can never be dissolved,
   asserting that his flesh is so compacted by the power of his divinity,
   that it can endure to eternity. Hence, therefore, he is called the
   standing one, as though he cannot fall by any corruption" (Ante-Nicene
   Library, vol. iii. p. 196). [To be found in vol. viii. of this series,
   with the other apocryphal Clementines.]

   [638] Gen. iii. 24.
     

   Chapter XIII.--His Doctrine of Emanation Further Expanded.

   Therefore, according to this reasoning, Simon became confessedly a god
   to his silly followers, as that Libyan, namely, Apsethus--begotten, no
   doubt, and subject to passion, when he may exist potentially, but
   devoid of propensions. (And this too, though born from one having
   propensions, and uncreated though born) from one that is begotten, when
   He may be fashioned into a figure, and, becoming perfect, may come
   forth from two of the primary powers, that is, Heaven and Earth. For
   Simon expressly speaks of this in the "Revelation" after this manner:
   "To you, then, I address the things which I speak, and (to you) I write
   what I write. The writing is this: there are two offshoots from all the
   Æons, having neither beginning nor end, from one root. And this is a
   power, viz., Sige, (who is) invisible (and) incomprehensible. And one
   of these (offshoots) appears from above, which constitutes a great
   power, (the creative) Mind of the universe, which manages all things,
   (and is) a male. The other (offshoot), however, is from below, (and
   constitutes) a great Intelligence, and is a female which produces all
   things. From whence, ranged in pairs opposite each other, they undergo
   conjugal union, and manifest an intermediate interval, namely, an
   incomprehensible air, which has neither beginning nor end. But in this
   is a father who sustains all things, and nourishes things that have
   beginning and end. This is he who stood, stands, and will stand, being
   an hermaphrodite power according to the pre-existent indefinite power,
   which has neither beginning nor end. Now this (power) exists in
   isolation. For Intelligence, (that subsists) in unity, proceeded forth
   from this (power), (and) became two. And that (father) was one, for
   having in himself this (power) he was isolated, and, however, He was
   not primal though pre-existent; but being rendered manifest to himself
   from himself, he passed into a state of duality. But neither was he
   denominated father before this (power) would style him father. As,
   therefore, he himself, bringing forward himself by means of himself,
   manifested unto himself his own peculiar intelligence, so also the
   intelligence, when it was manifested, did not exercise the function of
   creation. But beholding him, she concealed the Father within herself,
   that is, the power; and it is an hermaphrodite power, and an
   intelligence. And hence it is that they are ranged in pairs, one
   opposite the other; for power is in no wise different from
   intelligence, inasmuch as they are one. For from those things that are
   above is discovered power; and from those below, intelligence. So it
   is, therefore, that likewise what is manifested from these, being
   unity, is discovered (to be) duality, an hermaphrodite having the
   female in itself. This, (therefore,) is Mind (subsisting) in
   Intelligence; and these are separable one from the other, (though both
   taken together) are one, (and) are discovered in a state of duality."
     

   Chapter XIV.--Simon Interprets His System by the Mythological
   Representation of Helen of Troy; Gives an Account of Himself in
   Connection with the Trojan Heroine; Immorality of His Followers;
   Simon's View of Christ; The Simonists' Apology for Their Vice.

   Simon then, after inventing these (tenets), not only by evil devices
   interpreted the writings of Moses in whatever way he wished, but even
   the (works) of the poets. [639] For also he fastens an allegorical
   meaning on (the story of) the wooden horse and Helen with the torch,
   and on very many other (accounts), which he transfers to what relates
   to himself and to Intelligence, and (thus) furnishes a fictitious
   explanation of them. He said, however, that this (Helen) was the lost
   sheep. And she, always abiding among women, confounded the powers in
   the world by reason of her surpassing beauty. Whence, likewise, the
   Trojan war arose on her account. For in the Helen born at that time
   resided this Intelligence; and thus, when all the powers were for
   claiming her (for themselves), sedition and war arose, during which
   (this chief power) was manifested to nations. And from this
   circumstance, without doubt, we may believe that Stesichorus, who had
   through (some) verses reviled her, was deprived of the use of his eyes;
   and that, again, when he repented and composed recantations, in which
   he sung (Helen's) praises, he recovered the power of vision. But the
   angels and the powers below--who, he says, created the world--caused
   the transference from one body to another of (Helen's soul); and
   subsequently she stood on the roof of a house in Tyre, a city of
   Phoenicia, and on going down thither (Simon professed to have) found
   her. For he stated that, principally for the purpose of searching after
   this (woman), he had arrived (in Tyre), in order that he might rescue
   her from bondage. And after having thus redeemed her, he was in the
   habit of conducting her about with himself, alleging that this (girl)
   was the lost sheep, and affirming himself to be the Power above all
   things. But the filthy [640] fellow, becoming enamoured of this
   miserable woman called Helen, purchased her (as his slave), and enjoyed
   her person. [641] He, (however,) was likewise moved with shame towards
   his disciples, and concocted this figment.

   But, again, those who become followers of this impostor--I mean Simon
   the sorcerer--indulge in similar practices, and irrationally allege the
   necessity of promiscuous intercourse. They express themselves in the
   manner following: "All earth is earth, and there is no difference where
   any one sows, provided he does sow." But even they congratulate
   themselves on account of this indiscriminate intercourse, asserting
   that this is perfect love, and employing the expressions, "holy of
   holies," and "sanctify one another." [642] For (they would have us
   believe) that they are not overcome by the supposed vice, for that they
   have been redeemed. "And (Jesus), by having redeemed Helen in this
   way," (Simon says,) "has afforded salvation to men through his own
   peculiar intelligence. For inasmuch as the angels, by reason of their
   lust for pre-eminence, improperly managed the world, (Jesus Christ)
   being transformed, and being assimilated to the rulers and powers and
   angels, came for the restoration (of things). And so (it was that
   Jesus) appeared as man, when in reality he was not a man. And (so it
   was) that likewise he suffered--though not actually undergoing
   suffering, but appearing to the Jews to do so [643] --in Judea as Son,'
   and in Samaria as Father,' [644] and among the rest of the Gentiles as
   Holy Spirit.'" And (Simon alleges) that Jesus tolerated being styled by
   whichever name (of the three just mentioned) men might wish to call
   him. "And that the prophets, deriving their inspiration from the
   world-making angels, uttered predictions (concerning him)." Wherefore,
   (Simon said,) that towards these (prophets) those felt no concern up to
   the present, who believe on Simon and Helen, and that they do
   whatsoever they please, as persons free; for they allege that they are
   saved by grace. For that there is no reason for punishment, even though
   one shall act wickedly; for such a one is not wicked by nature, but by
   enactment. "For the angels who created the world made," he says,
   "whatever enactments they pleased," thinking by such (legislative)
   words to enslave those who listened to them. But, again, they speak of
   a dissolution [645] of the world, for the redemption of his own
   particular adherents.
     

   [639] Homer, for instance (See Epiphanius, Hæres., xxi. 3).

   [640] miaros, Bunsen's emendation for psuchros, the reading in Miller
   and Schneidewin. Some read psudros, i.e., lying; others pseudochristos,
   i.e., counterfeit Christ. Cruice considers Bunsen's emendation
   unnecessary, as psuchros may be translated "absurd fellow." The word,
   literally meaning cold, is applied in a derived sense to persons who
   were heartless,--an import suitable to Hippolytus' meaning.

   [641] [See Irenæus, vol. i. p. 348, and Bunsen's ideas, p. 50 of his
   first volume.]

   [642] This rendering is according to Bunsen's emendation of the text.

   [643] Cruice omits the word dedokekenai, which seems an interpolation.
   The above rendering adopts the proposed emendation.

   [644] Bunsen thinks that there is an allusion here to the conversation
   of our Lord with the woman of Samaria, and if so, that Menander, a
   disciple of Simon, and not Simon himself, was the author of The Great
   Announcement, as the heretic did not outlive St. Peter and Paul, and
   therefore died before the period at which St. John's Gospel was
   written.

   [645] Miller reads phusin, which makes no sense. The rendering above
   follows Bunsen's emendation of the text. [Here it is equally
   interesting to the student of our author or of Irenæus to turn to
   Bunsen (p. 51), and to observe his parallels.]
     

   Chapter XV.--Simon's Disciples Adopt the Mysteries; Simon Meets St.
   Peter at Rome; Account of Simon's Closing Years.

   The disciples, then, of this (Magus), celebrate magical rites, and
   resort to incantations. And (they profess to) transmit both love-spells
   and charms, and the demons said to be senders of dreams, for the
   purpose of distracting whomsoever they please. But they also employ
   those denominated Paredroi. "And they have an image of Simon
   (fashioned) into the figure of Jupiter, and (an image) of Helen in the
   form of Minerva; and they pay adoration to these." But they call the
   one Lord and the other Lady. And if any one amongst them, on seeing the
   images of either Simon or Helen, would call them by name, he is cast
   off, as being ignorant of the mysteries. This Simon, deceiving many
   [646] in Samaria by his sorceries, was reproved by the Apostles, and
   was laid under a curse, as it has been written in the Acts. But he
   afterwards abjured the faith, and attempted these (aforesaid
   practices). And journeying as far as Rome, [647] he fell in with the
   Apostles; and to him, deceiving many by his sorceries, Peter offered
   repeated opposition. This man, ultimately repairing to...(and) sitting
   under a plane tree, continued to give instruction (in his doctrines).
   And in truth at last, when conviction was imminent, in case he delayed
   longer, he stated that, if he were buried alive, he would rise the
   third day. And accordingly, having ordered a trench to be dug by his
   disciples, [648] he directed himself to be interred there. They, then,
   executed the injunction given; whereas he remained (in that grave)
   until this day, for he was not the Christ. This constitutes the
   legendary system advanced by Simon, and from this Valentinus derived a
   starting-point (for his own doctrine. This doctrine, in point of fact,
   was the same with the Simonian, though Valentinus) denominated it under
   different titles: for "Nous," and "Aletheia," and "Logos," and "Zoe,"
   and "Anthropos," and "Ecclesia," and Æons of Valentinus, are
   confessedly the six roots of Simon, viz., "Mind" and "Intelligence,"
   "Voice" and "Name," "Ratiocination" and "Reflection." But since it
   seems to us that we have sufficiently explained Simon's tissue of
   legends, let us see what also Valentinus asserts.
     

   [646] The Abbe Cruice considers that the statements made by Origen
   (Contr. Celsum, lib. i. p. 44, ed. Spenc.), respecting the followers of
   Simon in respect of number, militates against Origen's authorship of
   The Refutation.

   [647] This rendering follows the text of Schneidewin and Cruice.  The
   Clementine Recognitions (Ante-Nicene Library, ed. Edinb., vol. iii. p.
   273) represent Simon Magus as leaving for Rome, and St. Peter resolving
   to follow him thither.  Miller's text is different and as emended by
   him, Hippolytus' account would harmonize with that given in the Acts.
   Miller's text may be thus translated:  "And having been laid under a
   curse, as has been written in the Acts, he subsequently disapproved of
   his practices, and made an attempt to journey as far as Rome, but he
   fell in with the apostles," etc. The text of Cruice and Schneidewin
   seems less forced:  while the statement itself--a new witness to this
   controverted point in ecclesiastical history concerning St.
   Peter--corroborates Hippolytus' authorship of The Refutation.

   [648] Justin Martyr mentions, as an instance of the estimation in which
   Simon Magus was held among his followers, that a statue was erected to
   him at Rome. Bunsen considers that the rejection of this fable of
   Justin Martyr's, points to the author of The Refutation being a Roman,
   who would therefore, as he shows himself in the case of the statue, be
   better informed than the Eastern writer of any event occurring in the
   capital of the West. [Bunsen's magisterial decision (p. 53) is very
   amusingly characteristic.]  Hippolytus' silence is a presumption
   against the existence of such a statue, though it is very possible he
   might omit to mention it, supposing it to be at Rome. At all events,
   the very precise statement of Justin Martyr ought not to be rejected on
   slight or conjectural grounds. [See vol. i., this series, pp. 171 ,172,
   182, 187, and 193. But our author relies on Irenæus, same vol., p. 348.
   Why reject positive testimony?]
     

   Chapter XVI.--Heresy of Valentinus; Derived from Plato and Pythagoras.

   The heresy of Valentinus [649] is certainly, then, connected with the
   Pythagorean and Platonic theory. For Plato, in the Timæus, altogether
   derives his impressions from Pythagoras, and therefore Timæus himself
   is his Pythagorean stranger.  Wherefore, it appears expedient that we
   should commence by reminding (the reader) of a few points of the
   Pythagorean and Platonic theory, and that (then we should proceed) to
   declare the opinions of Valentinus. [650] For even although in the
   books previously finished by us with so much pains, are contained the
   opinions advanced by both Pythagoras and Plato, yet at all events I
   shall not be acting unreasonably, in now also calling to the
   recollection of the reader, by means of an epitome, the principal heads
   of the favourite tenets of these (speculators). And this
   (recapitulation) will facilitate our knowledge of the doctrines of
   Valentinus, by means of a nearer comparison, and by similarity of
   composition (of the two systems). For (Pythagoras and Plato) derived
   these tenets originally from the Egyptians, and introduced their novel
   opinions among the Greeks. But (Valentinus took his opinions) from
   these, because, although he has suppressed the truth regarding his
   obligations to (the Greek philosophers), and in this way has
   endeavoured to construct a doctrine, (as it were,) peculiarly his own,
   yet, in point of fact, he has altered the doctrines of those (thinkers)
   in names only, and numbers, and has adopted a peculiar terminology (of
   his own). Valentinus has formed his definitions by measures, in order
   that he may establish an Hellenic heresy, diversified no doubt, but
   unstable, and not connected with Christ.
     

   [649] Valentinus came from Alexandria to Rome during the pontificate of
   Hyginus, and established a school there. His desire seems to have been
   to remain in communion with Rome, which he did for many years, as
   Tertullian informs us. Epiphanius, however, tells that Valentinus,
   towards the end of his life, when living in Cyprus, separated entirely
   from the Church. Irenæus, book i.; Tertullian on Valentinus, and chap.
   xxx. of his Præscript.; Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., iv. 13, vi. 6;
   Theodoret, Hæret. Fab., i. 7; Epiphanius, Hær., xxxi.; St. Augustine,
   Hær., xi.; Philastrius, Hist. Hærs., c. viii.; Photius, Biblioth., cap.
   ccxxx.; Clemens Alexandrinus' Epitome of Theodotus (pp. 789-809, ed.
   Sylburg). The title is, 'Ek ton Theodotou kai tes anatolikes kaloumenes
   didaskalias, kata tous Oualentinou chronous epitomai.  See likewise
   Neander's Church History, vol. ii. Bohn's edition.

   [650] These opinions are mostly given in extracts from Valentinus' work
   Sophia, a book of great repute among Gnostics, and not named by
   Hippolytus, probably as being so well known at the time. The Gospel of
   Truth, mentioned by Irenæus as used among the Valentinians, is not,
   however, considered to be from the pen of Valentinus. In the extracts
   given by Hippolytus from Valentinus, it is important (as in the case of
   Basilides: see translator's introduction) to find that he quotes St.
   John's Gospel, and St. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians. The latter had
   been pronounced by the Tübingen school as belonging to the period of
   the Montanistic disputes in the middle of the second century, that is,
   somewhere about 25-30 years after Valentinus.
     

   Chapter XVII.--Origin of the Greek Philosophy.

   The origin, then, from which Plato derived his theory in the Timæus, is
   (the) wisdom of the Egyptians. [651] For from this source, by some
   ancient and prophetical tradition, Solon [652] taught his entire system
   concerning the generation and destruction of the world, as Plato says,
   to the Greeks, who were (in knowledge) young children, and were
   acquainted with no theological doctrine of greater antiquity. In order,
   therefore, that we may trace accurately the arguments by which
   Valentinus established his tenets, I shall now explain what are the
   principles of the philosophy of Pythagoras of Samos,--a philosophy
   (coupled) with that Silence so celebrated by the Greeks. And next in
   this manner (I shall elucidate) those (opinions) which Valentinus
   derives from Pythagoras and Plato, but refers with all solemnity of
   speech to Christ, and before Christ to the Father of the universe, and
   to Silence conjoined with the Father.
     

   [651] See Timæus, c. vii. ed. Bekker.

   [652] Or, "Solomon," evidently a mistake.
     

   Chapter XVIII.--Pythagoras' System of Numbers.

   Pythagoras, then, declared the originating principle of the universe to
   be the unbegotten monad, and the generated duad, and the rest of the
   numbers. And he says that the monad is the father of the duad, and the
   duad the mother of all things that are being begotten--the begotten one
   (being mother) of the things that are begotten. And Zaratas, the pupil
   of Pythagoras, was in the habit of denominating unity a father, and
   duality a mother. For the duad has been generated from the monad,
   according to Pythagoras; and the monad is male and primary, but the
   duad female (and secondary). And from the duad, again, as Pythagoras
   states, (are generated) the triad and the succeeding numbers up to ten.
   For Pythagoras is aware that this is the only perfect number--I mean
   the decade--for that eleven and twelve are an addition and repetition
   of the decade; not, however, that what is added [653] constitutes the
   generation of another number. And all solid bodies he generates from
   incorporeal (essences). For he asserts that an element and principle of
   both corporeal and incorporeal entities is the point which is
   indivisible. And from a point, he says, is generated a line, and from a
   line a surface; and a surface flowing out into a height becomes, he
   says, a solid body. Whence also the Pythagoreans have a certain object
   of adjuration, viz., the concord of the four elements. And they swear
   in these words:--

   "By him who to our head quaternion gives,

   A font that has the roots of everlasting nature." [654]

   Now the quaternion is the originating principle of natural and solid
   bodies, as the monad of intelligible ones. And that likewise the
   quaternion generates, [655] he says, the perfect number, as in the case
   of intelligibles (the monad) does the decade, they teach thus. If any,
   beginning to number, says one, and adds two, then in like manner three,
   these (together) will be six, and to these (add) moreover four, the
   entire (sum), in like manner, will be ten. For one, two, three, four,
   become ten, the perfect number. Thus, he says, the quaternion in every
   respect imitated the intelligible monad, which was able to generate a
   perfect number.
     

   [653] Miller would read for prostithemenon, nomisteon or nomizei.

   [654] Respecting these lines, Miller refers us to Fabricius, in Sextum
   Empiricum, p. 332.

   [655] The Abbe Cruice adduces a passage from Suidas (on the word
   arithmos) which contains a similar statement to that furnished by
   Hippolytus.
     

   Chapter XIX.--Pythagoras' Duality of Substances; His "Categories."

   There are, then, according to Pythagoras, two worlds: one intelligible,
   which has the monad for an originating principle; and the other
   sensible. But of this (latter) is the quaternion having the iota, the
   one tittle, [656] a perfect number. And there likewise is, according to
   the Pythagoreans, the i, the one tittle, which is chief and most
   dominant, and enables us to apprehend the substance of those
   intelligible entities which are capable of being understood through the
   medium of intellect and of sense. (And in this substance inhere) the
   nine incorporeal accidents which cannot exist without substance, viz.,
   "quality," and "quantity," and "relation," and "where," and "when," and
   "position," and "possession," and "action," and "passion." These, then,
   are the nine accidents (inhering in) substance, and when reckoned with
   these (substances), contains the perfect number, the i.  Wherefore, the
   universe being divided, as we said, into the intelligible and sensible
   world, we have also reason from the intelligible (world), in order that
   by reason we may behold the substance of things that are cognised by
   intellect, and are incorporeal and divine. But we have, he says, five
   senses--smelling, seeing, hearing, taste, and touch. Now, by these we
   arrive at a knowledge of things that are discerned by sense; and so, he
   says, the sensible is divided from the intelligible world. And that we
   have for each of these an instrument for attaining knowledge, we
   perceive from the following consideration. Nothing, he says, of
   intelligibles can be known to us from sense. For he says neither eye
   has seen, nor ear heard, nor any whatsoever of the other senses known
   that (which is cognised by mind). Neither, again, by reason is it
   possible to arrive at a knowledge of any of the things discernible by
   sense.  But one must see that a thing is white, and taste that it is
   sweet, and know by hearing that it is musical or out of tune. And
   whether any odour is fragrant or disagreeable, is the function of
   smell, not of reason. It is the same with objects of touch; for
   anything rough, or soft, or warm, or cold, it is not possible to know
   by hearing, but (far from it), for touch is the judge of such
   (sensations).  Things being thus constituted, the arrangement of things
   that have been made and are being made is observed to happen in
   conformity with numerical (combinations). For in the same manner as,
   commencing from monad, by an addition of monads or triads, and a
   collection of the succeeding numbers, we make some one very large
   complex whole of number; (and) then, again, from an amassed number thus
   formed by addition, we accomplish, by means of a certain subtraction
   and re-calculation, a solution of the totality of the aggregate
   numbers; so likewise he asserts that the world, bound by a certain
   arithmetical and musical chain, was, by its tension and relaxation, and
   by addition and subtraction, always and for ever preserved incorrupt.
     

   [656] Matt. v. 18.
     

   Chapter XX.--Pythagoras' Cosmogony; Similar to that of Empedocles.

   The Pythagoreans therefore declare their opinion concerning the
   continuance of the world in some such manner as this:--

   "For heretofore it was and will be; never, I ween,

   Of both of these will void the age eternal be."

   "Of these;" but what are they? Discord and Love. Now, in their system,
   Love forms the world incorruptible (and) eternal, as they suppose. For
   substance and the world are one. Discord, however, separates and puts
   asunder, and evinces numerous attempts by subdividing to form the
   world. It is just as if one severs into small parts, and divides
   arithmetically, the myriad into thousands, and hundreds, and tens; and
   drachmæ into oboli and small farthings. In this manner, he says,
   Discord severs the substance of the world into animals, plants, metals
   and things similar to these. And the fabricator of the generation of
   all things produced is, according to them, Discord; whereas Love, on
   the other hand, manages and provides for the universe in such a manner
   that it enjoys permanence. And conducting together [657] into unity the
   divided and scattered parts of the universe, and leading them forth
   from their (separate) mode of existence, (Love) unites and adds to the
   universe, in order that it may enjoy permanence; and it thus
   constitutes one system. They will not therefore cease,--neither Discord
   dividing the world, nor Love attaching to the world the divided parts.
   Of some such description as this, so it appears, is the distribution of
   the world according to Pythagoras. But Pythagoras says that the stars
   are fragments from the sun, and that the souls [658] of animals are
   conveyed from the stars; and that these are mortal when they are in the
   body, just as if buried, as it were, in a tomb: whereas that they rise
   (out of this world) and become immortal, when we are separated from our
   bodies.  Whence Plato, being asked by some one, "What is philosophy?"
   replied, "It is a separation of soul from body."
     

   [657] Or, sunagei, leads together.

   [658] The Abbe Cruice considers that the writer of The Refutation did
   not agree with Pythagoras' opinion regarding the soul,--a fact that
   negatives the authorship of Origen, who assented to the Pythagorean
   psychology. The question concerning the pre-existence of the soul is
   stated in a passage often quoted, viz., St. Jerome's Letter to
   Marcellina (Ep. 82).
     

   Chapter XXI.--Other Opinions of Pythagoras.

   Pythagoras, then, became a student of these doctrines likewise, in
   which he speaks both by enigmas and some such expressions as these:
   "When you depart from your own (tabernacle), return not; [659] if,
   however, (you act) not (thus), the Furies, auxiliaries to justice, will
   overtake you,"--denominating the body one's own (tabernacle), and its
   passions the Furies. When, therefore, he says, you depart, that is,
   when you go forth from the body, do not earnestly crave for this; but
   if you are eagerly desirous (for departure), the passions will once
   more confine you within the body. For these suppose that there is a
   transition of souls from one body to another, as also Empedocles,
   adopting the principles of Pythagoras, affirms. For, says he, souls
   that are lovers of pleasure, as Plato states, [660] if, when they are
   in the condition of suffering incidental to man, they do not evolve
   theories of philosophy, must pass through all animals and plants (back)
   again into a human body. And when (the soul) may form a system of
   speculation thrice in the same body, (he maintains) that it ascends up
   to the nature of some kindred star. If, however, (the soul) does not
   philosophize, (it must pass) through the same (succession of changes
   once more). He affirms, then, that the soul sometimes may become even
   mortal, if it is overcome by the Furies, that is, the passions (of the
   body); and immortal, if it succeeds in escaping the Furies, which are
   the passions.
     

   [659] Cruice thinks that the following words are taken from Heraclitus,
   and refers to Plutarch, De Exilio, c. xi.

   [660] Phædo, vol. i. p. 89, ed. Bekker.
     

   Chapter XXII.--The "Sayings" Of Pythagoras.

   But since also we have chosen to mention the sayings darkly expressed
   by Pythagoras to his disciples by means of symbols, it seems likewise
   expedient to remind (the reader) of the rest (of his doctrines. And we
   touch on this subject) on account also of the heresiarchs, who attempt
   by some method of this description to converse by means of symbols; and
   these are not their own, but they have, (in propounding them,) taken
   advantage of expressions employed by the Pythagoreans. [661] Pythagoras
   then instructs his disciples, addressing them as follows:  "Bind up the
   sack that carries the bedding." (Now,) inasmuch as they who intend
   going upon a journey tie their clothes into a wallet, to be ready for
   the road; so, (in like manner,) he wishes his disciples to be prepared,
   since every moment death is likely to come upon them by surprise. [662]
   (In this way Pythagoras sought to effect) that (his followers) should
   labour under no deficiency in the qualifications required in his
   pupils. [663] Wherefore of necessity he was in the habit, with the dawn
   of day, of instructing the Pythagoreans to encourage one another to
   bind up the sack that carries the bedding, that is, to be ready for
   death. "Do not stir fire with a sword;" [664] (meaning,) do not, by
   addressing him, quarrel with an enraged man; for a person in a passion
   is like fire, whereas the sword is the uttered expression. "Do not
   trample on a besom;" [665] (meaning,) despise not a small matter.
   "Plant not a palm tree in a house;" (meaning,) foment not discord in a
   family, for the palm tree is a symbol of battle and slaughter. [666]
   "Eat not from a stool;" (meaning,) do not undertake an ignoble art, in
   order that you may not be a slave to the body, which is corruptible,
   but make a livelihood from literature. For it lies within your reach
   both to nourish the body, and make the soul better. [667] "Don't take a
   bite out of an uncut loaf;" (meaning,) diminish not thy possessions,
   but live on the profit (of them), and guard thy substance as an entire
   loaf. [668]   "Feed not on beans; (meaning,) accept not the government
   of a city, for with beans they at that time were accustomed to ballot
   for their magistrates. [669]
     

   [661] These sayings (Symbola Pythagorica) have been collected by,
   amongst others, Thomas Stanley, and more recently by Gaspar Orellius.
   The meaning and the form of the proverbs given by Hippolytus do not
   always correspond with, e.g., Jamblichus (the biographer of
   Pythagoras), Porphyry, and Plutarch. The curious reader can see the
   Proverbs, in all their variety of readings and explanations, in the
   edition of L. Gyraldus.

   [662] This has been explained by Erasmus as a precept enjoining habits
   of tidiness and modesty.

   [663] Miller's text here yields a different but not very intelligible
   meaning.

   [664] Horace quotes this proverb (2 Serm., iii. 274) with a somewhat
   different meaning. Porphyry considers it a precept against irreverent
   language towards the Deity, the fire being a symbol--for instance, the
   vestal fire--of the everlasting nature of God. Skaleue in Hippolytus is
   also read, e.g., by Basil, zainontes, that is, cleaving. This alludes
   to some ancient game in which fire was struck at and severed.

   [665] Saron. This word also signifies "sweepings" or "refuse." Some say
   it means a Chaldean or Babylonian measure. The meaning would then be:
   Neglect not giving good measure, i.e., practise fair dealing. This
   agrees with another form of the proverb, reading zugon for saron--that
   is, overlook not the balance or scales.

   [666] Another meaning assigned to this proverb is, "Labour to no
   purpose." The palm, it is alleged, when it grows of itself, produces
   fruit, but sterility ensues upon transplantation. The proverb is also
   said to mean: Avoid what may seem agreeable, but really is injurious.
   This alludes to the quality of the wine (see Xenophon's Anab., ii.),
   which, pleasant in appearance, produced severe headache in those
   partaking of it.

   [667] "Eat not from a stool." This proverb is also differently read and
   interpreted. Another form is, "Eat not from a chariot," of which the
   import is variously given, as, Do not tamper with your health, because
   food swallowed in haste, as it must be when one is driving a team of
   horses, cannot be salutary or nutritive; or, Do not be careless,
   because one should attend to the business in hand; if that be guiding a
   chariot, one should not at the same time try to eat his meals.

   [668] The word "entire" Plutarch adds to this proverb. Its ancient form
   would seem to inculcate patience and courtesy, as if one should not,
   when at meals, snap at food before others. As read in Plutarch, it has
   been also interpreted as a precept to avoid creating dissension, the
   unbroken bread being a symbol of unity. It has likewise been explained
   as an injunction against greediness. The loaf was marked by two
   intersecting lines into four parts, and one was not to devour all of
   these. (See Horace, 1 Epist., xvii. 49.)

   [669] This is the generally received import of the proverb.  Ancient
   writers, however, put forward other meanings, connected chiefly with
   certain effects of beans, e.g., disturbing the mind, and producing
   melancholy, which Pythagoras is said to have noticed. Horace had no
   such idea concerning beans (see 2 Serm, vi. 63), but evidently alludes
   to a belief of the magi that disembodied spirits resided in beans. (See
   Lucian, Micyll.; Plutarch, Peri Paid.  'Agog. 17; Aulus Gellius, iv.
   11; and Guigniaut's Cruiser's Symbolik, i. 160.) [See p. 12 supra, and
   compare vol. ii., this series, p. 383, and Elucidation III. p. 403.]
     

   Chapter XXIII.--Pythagoras' Astronomic System.

   These, then, and such like assertions, the Pythagoreans put forward;
   and the heretics, imitating these, are supposed by some to utter
   important truths. The Pythagorean system, however, lays down that the
   Creator of all alleged existences is the Great Geometrician and
   Calculator--a sun; and that this one has been fixed in the whole world,
   just as in the bodies a soul, according to the statement of Plato. For
   the sun (being of the nature of) fire, [670] resembles the soul, but
   the earth (resembles the) body. And, separated from fire, there would
   be nothing visible, nor would there be any object of touch without
   something solid; but not any solid body exists without earth. Whence
   the Deity, locating air in the midst, fashioned the body of the
   universe out of fire and earth. And the Sun, he says, calculates and
   geometrically measures the world in some such manner as the following:
   The world is a unity cognizable by sense; and concerning this (world)
   we now make these assertions. But one who is an adept in the science of
   numbers, and a geometrician, has divided it into twelve parts. And the
   names of these parts are as follow: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
   Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. Again,
   he divides each of the twelve parts into thirty parts, and these are
   days of the month. Again, he divides each part of the thirty parts into
   sixty small divisions, and (each) of these small (divisions) he
   subdivides into minute portions, and (these again) into portions still
   more minute. And always doing this, and not intermitting, but
   collecting from these divided portions (an aggregate), and constituting
   it a year; and again resolving and dividing the compound, (the sun)
   completely finishes the great and everlasting world. [671]
     

   [670] The text seems doubtful. Some would read, "The sun is (to be
   compared with) soul, and the moon with body."

   [671] Or, "completes the great year of the world" (see book iv. chap.
   vii. of The Refutation).
     

   Chapter XXIV.--Valentinus Convicted of Plagiarisms from the Platonic
   and Pythagoric Philosophy; The Valentinian Theory of Emanation by
   Duads.

   Of some such nature, as I who have accurately examined their systems
   (have attempted) to state compendiously, is the opinion of Pythagoras
   and Plato. And from this (system), not from the Gospels, Valentinus, as
   we have proved, has collected the (materials of) heresy--I mean his own
   (heresy)--and may (therefore) justly be reckoned a Pythagorean and
   Platonist, not a Christian. Valentinus, therefore, and Heracleon, and
   Ptolemæus, and the entire school of these (heretics), as disciples of
   Pythagoras and Plato, (and) following these guides, have laid down as a
   fundamental principle of their doctrine the arithmetical system. For,
   likewise, according to these (Valentinians), the originating cause of
   the universe is a Monad, unbegotten, imperishable, incomprehensible,
   inconceivable, productive, and a cause of the generation of all
   existent things. And the aforesaid Monad is styled by them Father.
   There is, however, discoverable among them some considerable diversity
   of opinion. For some of them, in order that the Pythagorean doctrine of
   Valentinus may be altogether free from admixture (with other tenets),
   suppose that the Father is unfeminine, and unwedded, and solitary. But
   others, imagining it to be impossible that from a male only there could
   proceed a generation at all of any of those things that have been made
   to exist, necessarily reckon along with the Father of the universe, in
   order that he may be a father, Sige as a spouse. But as to Sige,
   whether at any time she is united in marriage (to the Father) or not,
   this is a point which we leave them to wrangle about among themselves.
   We at present, keeping to the Pythagorean principle, which is one, and
   unwedded, unfeminine, (and) deficient in nothing, shall proceed to give
   an account of their doctrines, as they themselves inculcate them.
   There is, says (Valentinus), not anything at all begotten, but the
   Father is alone unbegotten, not subject to the condition of place, not
   (subject to the condition of) time, having no counsellor, (and) not
   being any other substance that could be realized according to the
   ordinary methods of perception. (The Father,) however, was solitary,
   subsisting, as they say, in a state of quietude, and Himself reposing
   in isolation within Himself. When, however, He became productive, [672]
   it seemed to Him expedient at one time to generate and lead forth the
   most beautiful and perfect (of those germs of existence) which He
   possessed within Himself, for (the Father) was not fond of
   solitariness. For, says he, He was all love, but love is not love
   except there may be some object of affection. The Father Himself, then,
   as He was solitary, projected and produced Nous and Aletheia, that is,
   a duad which became mistress, [673] and origin, and mother of all the
   Æons computed by them (as existing) within the Pleroma. Nous and
   Aletheia being projected from the Father, [674] one capable of
   continuing generation, deriving existence from a productive being,
   (Nous) himself likewise, in imitation of the Father, projected Logos
   and Zoe; and Logos and Zoe project Anthropos and Ecclesia. But Nous and
   Aletheia, when they beheld that their own offspring had been born
   productive, returned thanks to the Father of the universe, and offer
   unto Him a perfect number, viz., ten Æons. For, he says, Nous and
   Aletheia could not offer unto the Father a more perfect (one) than this
   number. For the Father, who is perfect, ought to be celebrated by a
   perfect number, and ten is a perfect number, because this is first of
   those (numbers) that are formed by plurality, (and therefore) perfect.
   [675] The Father, however, being more perfect, because being alone
   unbegotten, by means of the one primary conjugal union of Nous and
   Aletheia, found means of projecting all the roots of existent things.
     

   [672] Valentinus' system, if purged of the glosses put upon it by his
   disciples, appears to have been constructed out of a grand conception
   of Deity, and evidences much power of abstraction. Between the essence
   of God, dwelling in the midst of isolation prior to an exercise of the
   creative energy, and the material worlds, Valentinus interposes an
   ideal world. Through the latter, the soul--of a kindred nature--is
   enabled to mount up to God. This is the import of the terms Bythus
   (depth) and Sige (silence, i.e., solitariness) afterwards used.

   [673] kuria: instead of this has been suggested the reading kai rhiza,
   i.e., "which is both the root," etc.

   [674] In all this Valentinus intends to delineate the progress from
   absolute to phenomenal being. There are three developments in this
   transition. Absolute being (Bythus and Sige) is the same as the eternal
   thought and consciousness of God's own essence.  Here we have the
   primary emanation, viz., Nous, i.e., Mind (called also Monogenes,
   only-begotten), and Aletheia, i.e., Truth. Next comes the ideal
   manifestation through the Logos, i.e., Word (obviously borrowed from
   the prologue to St. John's Gospel), and Zoe, i.e., Life (taken from the
   same source). We have then the passage from the ideal to the actual in
   Anthropos, i.e., Man, and Ecclesia, i.e., Church. These last are the
   phenomenal manifestations of the divine mind.

   [675] teleios: Bunsen would read telos, which Cruice objects to on
   account of the word teleioteros occurring in the next sentence.
     

   Chapter XXV.--The Tenet of the Duad Made the Foundation of Valentinus'
   System of the Emanation of Æons.

   Logos himself also, and Zoe, then saw that Nous and Aletheia had
   celebrated the Father of the universe by a perfect number; and Logos
   himself likewise with Zoe wished to magnify their own father and
   mother, Nous and Aletheia. Since, however, Nous and Aletheia were
   begotten, and did not possess paternal (and) perfect uncreatedness,
   Logos and Zoe do not glorify Nous their father with a perfect number,
   but far from it, with an imperfect one. [676] For Logos and Zoe offer
   twelve Æons unto Nous and Aletheia. For, according to Valentinus,
   these--namely, Nous and Aletheia, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and
   Ecclesia--have been the primary roots of the Æons. But there are ten
   Æons proceeding from Nous and Aletheia, and twelve from Logos and
   Zoe--twenty and eight in all. [677] And to these (ten) they give these
   following denominations: [678] Bythus and Mixis, Ageratus and Henosis,
   Autophyes and Hedone, Acinetus and Syncrasis, Monogenes and Macaria.
   [679] These are ten Æons whom some say (have been projected) by Nous
   and Aletheia, but some by Logos and Zoe. Others, however, affirm that
   the twelve (Æons have been projected) by Anthropos and Ecclesia, while
   others by Logos and Zoe. And upon these they bestow these following
   names: [680]   Paracletus and Pistis, Patricus and Elpis, Metricus and
   Agape, Æinous and Synesis, Ecclesiasticus and Macariotes, Theletus and
   Sophia. But of the twelve, the twelfth and youngest of all the
   twenty-eight Æons, being a female, and called Sophia, observed the
   multitude and power of the begetting Æons, and hurried back into the
   depth of the Father. And she perceived that all the rest of the Æons,
   as being begotten, generate by conjugal intercourse. The Father, on the
   other hand, alone, without copulation, has produced (an offspring). She
   wished to emulate the Father, [681] and to produce (offspring) of
   herself without a marital partner, that she might achieve a work in no
   wise inferior [682] to (that of) the Father. (Sophia, however,) was
   ignorant that the Unbegotten One, being an originating principle of the
   universe, as well as root and depth and abyss, alone possesses the
   power of self-generation. But Sophia, being begotten, and born after
   many more (Æons), is not able to acquire possession of the power
   inherent in the Unbegotten One. For in the Unbegotten One, he says, all
   things exist simultaneously, but in the begotten (Æons) the female is
   projective of substance, and the male is formative of the substance
   which is projected by the female. Sophia, therefore, prepared to
   project that only which she was capable (of projecting), viz., a
   formless and undigested substance. [683] And this, he says, is what
   Moses asserts: "The earth was invisible, and unfashioned." This
   (substance) is, he says, the good (and) the heavenly Jerusalem, into
   which God has promised to conduct the children of Israel, saying, "I
   will bring you into a land flowing with milk and honey."
     

   [676] This follows the text as emended by Bernays.

   [677] The number properly should be thirty, as there were two tetrads:
   (1) Bythus, Sige, Nous, and Aletheia; (2) Logos, Zoe, Ecclesia, and
   Anthropos. Some, as we learn from Hippolytus, made up the number to
   thirty, by the addition of Christ and the Holy Ghost,--a fact which
   Bunsen thinks conclusively proves that the alleged generation of Æons
   was a subsequent addition to Valentinus' system.

   [678] There is some confusion in Hippolytus' text, which is, however,
   removeable by a reference to Irenæus (i. 1).

   [679] We subjoin the meanings of these names:-- Ten Æons from Nous and
   Aletheia, (or) Logos and Zoe, viz.:-- 1. Bythus = Profundity. 2. Mixis
   = Mixture. 3. Ageratos = Ever-young. 4. Henosis = Unification. 5.
   Autophyes = Self-grown. 6. Hedone = Voluptuousness. 7. Acinetus =
   Motionless. 8. Syncrasis = Composition. 9. Monogenes = Only-begotten.
   10. Macaria = Blessedness.

   [680] The following are the meanings of these names:-- Twelve Æons from
   Anthropos and Ecclesia, (or) Logos and Zoe:-- 1. Paracletus =
   Comforter. 2. Pistis = Faith. 3.  Patricus = Paternal. 4. Elpis = Hope.
   5. Metricus = Temperate. 6. Agape = Love. 7. Æinous = Ever-thinking. 8.
   Synesis = Intelligence. 9. Ecclesiasticus = Ecclesiastical. 10.
   Makariotes = Felicity. 11. Theletus = Volition. 12. Sophia = Wisdom.

   [681] [Rev. ii. 24. It belongs to the "depths of Satan" to create
   mythologies that caricature the Divine mysteries. Cf. 2 Cor. ii. 11.]

   [682] This Sophia was, so to speak, the bridge which spanned the abyss
   between God and Reality. Under an aspect of this kind Solomon (Prov.
   viii.) views Wisdom; and Valentinus introduces it into his system,
   according to the old Judaistic interpretation of Sophia, as the
   instrument for God's creative energy. But Sophia thought to pass beyond
   her function as the connecting link between limited and illimitable
   existence, by an attempt to evolve the infinite from herself. She
   fails, and an abortive image of the true Wisdom is procreated, while
   Sophia herself sinks into this nether world.

   [683] Miller's text has, "a well-formed and properly-digested
   substance." This reading is, however, obviously wrong, as is proved by
   a reference to what Epiphanius states (Hær., xxxi.) concerning
   Valentinus.
     

   Chapter XXVI.--Valentinus' Explanation of the Existence of Christ and
   the Spirit.

   Ignorance, therefore, having arisen within the Pleroma in consequence
   of Sophia, and shapelessness in consequence of the offspring of Sophia,
   confusion arose in the Pleroma. (For all) the Æons that were begotten
   (became overwhelmed with apprehension, imagining) that in like manner
   formless and incomplete progenies of the Æons should be generated; and
   that some destruction, at no distant period, should at length seize
   upon the Æons. All the Æons, then, betook themselves to supplication of
   the Father, that he would tranquillize the sorrowing Sophia; for she
   continued weeping and bewailing on account of the abortion produced by
   her,--for so they term it. The Father, then, compassionating the tears
   of Sophia, and accepting the supplication of the Æons, orders a further
   projection. For he did not, (Valentinus) says, himself project, but
   Nous and Aletheia (projected) Christ and the Holy Spirit for the
   restoration of Form, and the destruction of the abortion, and (for) the
   consolation and cessation of the groans of Sophia. And thirty Æons came
   into existence along with Christ and the Holy Spirit. Some of these
   (Valentinians) wish that this should be a triacontad of Æons, whereas
   others desire that Sige should exist along with the Father, and that
   the Æons should be reckoned along with them.

   Christ, therefore, being additionally projected, and the Holy Spirit,
   by Nous and Aletheia, immediately this abortion of Sophia, (which was)
   shapeless, (and) born of herself only, and generated without conjugal
   intercourse, separates from the entire of the Æons, lest the perfect
   Æons, beholding this (abortion), should be disturbed by reason of its
   shapelessness. In order, then, that the shapelessness of the abortion
   might not at all manifest itself to the perfect Æons, the Father also
   again projects additionally one Æon, viz., Staurus. And he being
   begotten great, as from a mighty and perfect father, and being
   projected for the guardianship and defence of the Æons, becomes a limit
   of the Pleroma, having within itself all the thirty Æons together, for
   these are they that had been projected. Now this (Æon) is styled Horos,
   because he separates from the Pleroma the Hysterema that is outside.
   And (he is called) Metocheus, because he shares also in the Hysterema.
   And (he is denominated) Staurus, because he is fixed inflexibly and
   inexorably, so that nothing of the Hysterema can come near the Æons who
   are within the Pleroma. Outside, then, Horos, (or) Metocheus, [684]
   (or) Staurus, is the Ogdoad, as it is called, according to them, and is
   that Sophia which is outside the Pleroma, which (Sophia) Christ, who
   was additionally projected by Nous and Aletheia, formed and made a
   perfect Æon so that in no respect she should be inferior in power to
   any of the Æons within the Pleroma. [685] Since, however, Sophia was
   formed outside, and it was not possible and equitable that Christ and
   the Holy Spirit, who were projected from Nous and Aletheia, should
   remain outside the Pleroma, Christ hurried away, and the Holy Spirit,
   from her who had had shape imparted to her, unto Nous and Aletheia
   within the Limit, in order that with the rest of the Æons they might
   glorify the Father.
     

   [684] Or, "Metagogeus"(see Irenæus, i. 1, 2, iii. 1).

   [685] Bunsen corrects the passage, "So that she should not be inferior
   to any of the Æons, or unequal (in power) to any (of them)."
     

   Chapter XXVII.--Valentinus' Explanation of the Existence of Jesus;
   Power of Jesus Over Humanity.

   After, then, there ensued some one (treaty of) peace and harmony
   between all the Æons within the Pleroma, it appeared expedient to them
   not only by a conjugal union to have magnified the Son, but also that
   by an offering of ripe fruits they should glorify the Father. Then all
   the thirty Æons consented to project one Æon, joint fruit of the
   Pleroma, that he might be (an earnest) of their union, [686] and
   unanimity, and peace. And he alone was projected by all the Æons in
   honour of the Father.  This (one) is styled among them "Joint Fruit of
   the Pleroma." These (matters), then, took place within the Pleroma in
   this way. And the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma" was projected, (that
   is,) Jesus,--for this is his name,--the great High Priest. Sophia,
   however, who was outside the Pleroma in search of Christ, who had given
   her form, and of the Holy Spirit, became involved in great terror that
   she would perish, if he should separate from her, who had given her
   form and consistency. And she was seized with grief, and fell into a
   state of considerable perplexity, (while) reflecting who was he who had
   given her form, what the Holy Spirit was, whither he had departed, who
   it was that had hindered them from being present, who it was that had
   been envious of that glorious and blessed spectacle. While involved in
   sufferings such as these, she turns herself to prayer and supplication
   of him who had deserted her. During the utterance of her entreaties,
   Christ, who is within the Pleroma, had mercy upon (her), and all the
   rest of the Æons (were similarly affected); and they send forth beyond
   the Pleroma "the Joint Fruit of the Pleroma" as a spouse for Sophia,
   who was outside, and as a rectifier of those sufferings which she
   underwent in searching after Christ.

   "The Fruit," then, arriving outside the Pleroma, and discovering
   (Sophia) in the midst of those four primary passions, both fear and
   sorrow, and perplexity and entreaty, he rectified her affections.
   While, however, correcting them, he observed that it would not be
   proper to destroy these, inasmuch as they are (in their nature)
   eternal, and peculiar to Sophia; and yet that neither was it seemly
   that Sophia should exist in the midst of such passions, in fear and
   sorrow, supplication (and) perplexity. He therefore, as an Æon so
   great, and (as) offspring of the entire Pleroma, caused the passions to
   depart from her, and he made these substantially-existent essences.
   [687] He altered fear into animal desire, [688] and (made) grief
   material, and (rendered) perplexity (the passion) of demons. But
   conversion, [689] and entreaty, and supplication, he constituted as a
   path to repentance and power over the animal essence, which is
   denominated right. [690] The Creator [691] (acted) from fear; (and)
   that is what, he says, Scripture affirms: "The fear of the Lord is the
   beginning of wisdom." [692] For this is the beginning of the affections
   of Sophia, for she was seized with fear, next with grief, then with
   perplexity, and so she sought refuge in entreaty and supplication. And
   the animal essence is, he says, of a fiery nature, and is also termed
   by them the super-celestial Topos, and Hebdomad, [693] and "Ancient of
   Days." [694] And whatever other such statements they advance respecting
   this (Æon), these they allege to hold good of the animalish (one), whom
   they assert to be creator of the world. Now he is of the appearance of
   fire. Moses also, he says, expresses himself thus: "The Lord thy God is
   a burning and consuming fire." [695] For he, likewise, wishes (to
   think) that it has been so written. There is, however, he says, a
   twofold power of the fire; for fire is all-consuming, (and) cannot be
   quenched. According, therefore, to this division, there exists, subject
   to death, a certain soul which is a sort of mediator, for it is a
   Hebdomad and Cessation. [696] For underneath the Ogdoad, where Sophia
   is, but above Matter, which is the Creator, a day has been formed,
   [697] and the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma." If the soul has been
   fashioned in the image of those above, that is, the Ogdoad, it became
   immortal and repaired to the Ogdoad, which is, he says, heavenly
   Jerusalem. If, however, it has been fashioned in the image of Matter,
   that is, the corporeal passions, the soul is of a perishable nature,
   and is (accordingly) destroyed.
     

   [686] enotetos: Miller has neotetos, i.e., youth. The former is the
   emendation of Bernays.

   [687] This is Bunsen's text, hupostatous.  Duncker reads hupostatikas,
   hypostatic.

   [688] Some read ousian (see Theodoret, Hær., c. vii.).

   [689] epistrophen; or it may be rendered "solicitude." Literally, it
   means a turning towards, as in this instance, for the purpose of prayer
   (see Irenæus, i. 5).

   [690] Valentinus denominates what is psychical (natural) right, and
   what is material or pathematic left (see Irenæus, i. 5).

   [691] Cruice renders the passage thus: "which is denominated right, or
   Demiurge, while fear it is that accomplishes this transformation." The
   Demiurge is of course called "right," as being the power of the
   psychical essence (see Clemens Alexandrinus, Hypot. excerpta e Theod.,
   c. 43).

   [692] Ps. cxi. 10; Prov. i. 7; ix. 10.

   [693] Schneidewin fills up the hiatus thus: "Place of Mediation." The
   above translation adopts the emendation of Cruice (see Irenæus, i. 5).

   [694] Dan. vii. 9, 13, 22.

   [695] Deut. ix. 3; Ps. l. 3; Heb. xii. 29.

   [696] Gen. ii. 2.

   [697] See Epistle of Barnabas, chap. xv. vol. i. p. 146, and Ignatius'
   Letter to the Magnesians, chap. ix. p. 63, this series.
     

   Chapter XXVIII.--The Valentinian Origin of the Creation.

   As, therefore, the primary and greatest power [698] of the animal
   essence came into existence, an image (of the only begotten Son); so
   also the devil, who is the ruler of this world, constitutes the power
   of the material essence, as Beelzebub is of the essence of demons which
   emanates from anxiety. (In consequence of this,) Sophia from above
   exerted her energy from the Ogdoad to the Hebdomad. For the Demiurge,
   they say, knows nothing at all, but is, according to them, devoid of
   understanding, and silly, and is not conscious of what he is doing or
   working at. But in him, while thus in a state of ignorance that even he
   is producing, Sophia wrought all sorts of energy, and infused vigour
   (into him). And (although Sophia) was really the operating cause, he
   himself imagines that he evolves the creation of the world out of
   himself: whence he commenced, saying, "I am God, and beside me there is
   no other." [699]
     

   [698] The opening sentence in this chapter is confused in Miller's
   text. The sense, however, as given above, is deducible from a reference
   to a corresponding passage in Irenæus (i. 5).

   [699] Deut. iv. 35; Isa. xlv. 5, 14, 18, 21, 22.
     

   Chapter XXIX.--The Other Valentinian Emanations in Conformity with the
   Pythagorean System of Numbers.

   The quaternion, then, advocated by Valentinus, is "a source of the
   everlasting nature having roots;" [700] and Sophia (is the power) from
   whom the animal and material creation has derived its present
   condition.  But Sophia is called "Spirit," and the Demiurge "Soul," and
   the Devil "the ruler of this world," and Beelzebub "the (ruler) of
   demons."  These are the statements which they put forward. But further,
   in addition to these, rendering, as I have previously mentioned, their
   entire system of doctrine (akin to the) arithmetical (art), (they
   determine) that the thirty Æons within the Pleroma have again, in
   addition to these, projected other Æons, according to the (numerical)
   proportion (adopted by the Pythagoreans), in order that the Pleroma
   might be formed into an aggregate, according to a perfect number. For
   how the Pythagoreans divided (the celestial sphere) into twelve and
   thirty and sixty parts, and how they have minute parts of diminutive
   portions, has been made evident.

   In this manner these (followers of Valentinus) subdivide the parts
   within the Pleroma. Now likewise the parts in the Ogdoad have been
   subdivided, and there has been projected Sophia, which is, according to
   them, mother of all living creatures, and the "Joint Fruit of the
   Pleroma," (who is) the Logos, [701] (and other Æons,) who are celestial
   angels that have their citizenship in Jerusalem which is above, which
   is in heaven. For this Jerusalem is Sophia, she (that is) outside (the
   Pleroma), and her spouse is the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma." And the
   Demiurge projected souls; for this (Sophia) is the essence of souls.
   This (Demiurge), according to them, is Abraham, and these (souls) the
   children of Abraham. From the material and devilish essence the
   Demiurge fashioned bodies for the souls. This is what has been
   declared: "And God formed man, taking clay from the earth, and breathed
   upon his face the breath of life, and man was made into a living soul."
   [702] This, according to them, is the inner man, the natural (man),
   residing in the material body: Now a material (man) is perishable,
   incomplete, (and) formed out of the devilish essence. And this is the
   material man, as it were, according to them an inn, [703] or domicile,
   at one time of soul only, at another time of soul and demons, at
   another time of soul and Logoi. [704] And these are the Logoi that have
   been dispersed from above, from the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma" and
   (from) Sophia, into this world. And they dwell in an earthly body, with
   a soul, when demons do not take up their abode with that soul. This, he
   says, is what has been written in Scripture: "On this account I bend my
   knees to the God and Father and Lord of our Lord Jesus Christ, that God
   would grant you to have Christ dwelling in the inner man," [705] --that
   is, the natural (man), not the corporeal (one),--"that you may be able
   to understand what is the depth," which is the Father of the universe,
   "and what is the breadth," which is Staurus, the limit of the Pleroma,
   "or what is the length," that is, the Pleroma of the Æons. Wherefore,
   he says, "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
   God, for they are foolishness unto him;" [706] but folly, he says, is
   the power of the Demiurge, for he was foolish and devoid of
   understanding, and imagined himself to be fabricating the world.  He
   was, however, ignorant that Sophia, the Mother, the Ogdoad, was really
   the cause of all the operations performed by him who had no
   consciousness in reference to the creation of the world.
     

   [700] These words are a line out of Pythagoras' Golden Verses:-- Pege
   tis aenaou phuseos rhizomat' echousa--(48).

   [701] The Abbe Cruise thinks that a comparison of this passage with the
   corresponding one in Irenæus suggests the addition of hoi doruphoroi
   after Logos, i.e., the Logos and his satellites. [Vol. i. p. 381, this
   series.]

   [702] Gen. ii. 7.

   [703] Or, "subterranean" (Cruice).

   [704] Epiphanius, Hær., xxxi. sec. 7.

   [705] Eph. iii. 14-18.

   [706] 1 Cor. ii. 14.
     

   Chapter XXX.--Valentinus' Explanation of the Birth of Jesus; Twofold
   Doctrine on the Nature of Jesus' Body; Opinion of the Italians, that
   Is, Heracleon and Ptolemæus; Opinion of the Orientals, that Is,
   Axionicus and Bardesanes.

   All the prophets, therefore, and the law, spoke by means of the
   Demiurge,--a silly god, [707] he says, (and themselves) fools, who knew
   nothing. On account of this, he says, the Saviour observes:  "All that
   came before me are thieves and robbers." [708] And the apostle (uses
   these words): "The mystery which was not made known to former
   generations." [709] For none of the prophets, he says, said anything
   concerning the things of which we speak; for (a prophet) could not but
   be ignorant of all (these) things, inasmuch as they certainly had been
   uttered by the Demiurge only. When, therefore, the creation received
   completion, and when after (this) there ought to have been the
   revelation of the sons of God--that is, of the Demiurge, which up to
   this had been concealed, and in which obscurity the natural man was
   hid, and had a veil upon the heart;--when (it was time), then, that the
   veil should be taken away, and that these mysteries should be seen,
   Jesus was born of Mary the virgin, according to the declaration (in
   Scripture), "The Holy Ghost will come upon thee"--Sophia is the
   Spirit--"and the power of the Highest will overshadow thee"--the
   Highest is the Demiurge,--"wherefore that which shall be born of thee
   shall be called holy." [710] For he has been generated not from the
   highest alone, as those created in (the likeness of) Adam have been
   created from the highest alone--that is, (from) Sophia and the
   Demiurge. Jesus, however, the new man, (has been generated) from the
   Holy Spirit--that is, Sophia and the Demiurge--in order that the
   Demiurge may complete the conformation and constitution of his body,
   and that the Holy Spirit may supply his essence, and that a celestial
   Logos may proceed from the Ogdoad being born of Mary.

   Concerning this (Logos) they have a great question amongst them--an
   occasion both of divisions and dissension.  And hence the doctrine of
   these has become divided: and one doctrine, according to them, is
   termed Oriental, and the other Italian. They from Italy, of whom is
   Heracleon and Ptolemæus, say that the body of Jesus was (an) animal
   (one).  And on account of this, (they maintain) that at his baptism the
   Holy Spirit as a dove came down--that is, the Logos of the mother
   above, (I mean Sophia)--and became (a voice) to the animal (man), and
   raised him from the dead. This, he says, is what has been declared: "He
   who raised Christ from the dead will also quicken your mortal and
   natural bodies." [711] For loam has come under a curse; "for," says he,
   "dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." [712] The Orientals,
   on the other hand, of whom is Axionicus [713] and Bardesianes, [714]
   assert that the body of the Saviour was spiritual; for there came upon
   Mary the Holy Spirit--that is, Sophia and the power of the highest.
   This is the creative art, (and was vouchsafed) in order that what was
   given to Mary by the Spirit might be fashioned.
     

   [707] Epiphanius, Hær., xxxi. 22.

   [708] John x. 8.

   [709] Col. i. 26.

   [710] Luke i. 35.

   [711] Rom. viii. 11, 12.

   [712] Gen. iii. 19.

   [713] Axionicus is mentioned by Tertullian only (see Tertullian, Contr.
   Valent., c. iv; [vol. iii. p. 505, this series]).

   [714] Bardesianes (or Ardesianes, as Miller's text has it) is evidently
   the same with Bardesanes, mentioned by Eusebius and St. Jerome.
     

   Chapter XXXI.--Further Doctrines of Valentinus Respecting the Æons;
   Reasons for the Incarnation.

   Let, then, those (heretics) pursue these inquiries among themselves,
   (and let others do so likewise,) if it should prove agreeable to
   anybody else to investigate (such points.  Valentinus) subjoins,
   however, the following statement: That the trespasses appertaining to
   the Æons within (the Pleroma) had been corrected; and likewise had been
   rectified the trespasses appertaining to the Ogdoad, (that is,) Sophia,
   outside (the Pleroma); and also (the trespasses) appertaining to the
   Hebdomad (had been rectified).  For the Demiurge had been taught by
   Sophia that He is not Himself God alone, as He imagined, and that
   except Himself there is not another (Deity). But when taught by Sophia,
   He was made to recognise the superior (Deity). For He was instructed
   [715] by her, and initiated and indoctrinated into the great mystery of
   the Father and of the Æons, and divulged this to none. This is, as he
   says, what (God) declares to Moses: "I am the God of Abraham, and the
   God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and my name I have not announced to
   them;" [716] that is, I have not declared the mystery, nor explained
   who is God, but I have preserved the mystery which I have heard from
   Sophia in secrecy with myself. When, then, the trespasses of those
   above had been rectified, it was necessary, according to the same
   consequence, that the (transgressions) here likewise should obtain
   rectification.  On this account Jesus the Saviour was born of Mary that
   he might rectify (the trespasses committed) here; as the Christ who,
   having been projected additionally from above by Nous and Aletheia, had
   corrected the passions of Sophia--that is, the abortion (who was)
   outside (the Pleroma). And, again, the Saviour who was born of Mary
   came to rectify the passions [717] of the soul. There are therefore,
   according to these (heretics), three Christs: (the first the) one
   additionally projected by Nous and Aletheia, along with the Holy
   Spirit; and (the second) the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma," spouse of
   Sophia, who was outside (the Pleroma). And she herself is likewise
   styled Holy Spirit, but one inferior to the first (projection). And the
   third (Christ is) He who was born of Mary for the restoration of this
   world of ours.
     

   [715] katechethe.  Miller's text has katechthe, which is properly
   corrected by Bunsen into the word as translated above.

   [716] Ex. vi. 2, 3.

   [717] Or, "the multitudes."
     

   Chapter XXXII.--Valentinus Convicted of Plagiarisms from Plato.

   I think that the heresy of Valentinus which is of Pythagorean (origin),
   has been sufficiently, indeed more than sufficiently, delineated. It
   therefore seems also expedient, that having explained his opinions, we
   should desist from (further) refutation (of his system). Plato, then,
   in expounding mysteries concerning the universe, writes to Dionysius
   expressing himself after some such manner [718] as this: "I must speak
   to you by riddles, [719] in order that if the letter may meet with any
   accident in its leaves by either sea or land, he who reads (what falls
   into his hands) may not understand it. For so it is.  All things are
   about the King of all, and on his account are all things, and he is
   cause of all the glorious (objects of creation). The second is about
   the second, and the third about the third. But pertaining to the King
   there is none of those things of which I have spoken. But after this
   the soul earnestly desires to learn what sort these are, looking upon
   those things that are akin to itself, and not one of these is (in
   itself) sufficient. This is, O son of Dionysius and Doris, the question
   (of yours) which is a cause of all evil things. Nay, but rather the
   solicitude concerning this is innate in the soul; and if one does not
   remove this, he will never really attain truth. [720] But what is
   astonishing in this matter, listen. For there are men who have heard
   these things--(men) furnished with capacities for learning, and
   furnished with capacities of memory, and persons who altogether in
   every way are endued with an aptitude for investigation with a view to
   inference. (These are) at present aged speculators. [721] And they
   assert that opinions which at one time were credible are now
   incredible, and that things once incredible are now the contrary.
   While, therefore, turning the eye of examination towards these
   (inquiries), exercise caution, lest at any time you should have reason
   to repent in regard of those things should they happen in a manner
   unbecoming to your dignity. On this account I have written nothing
   concerning these (points); nor is there any treatise of Plato's (upon
   them), nor ever shall there be. The observations, however, now made are
   those of Socrates, conspicuous for virtue even while he was a young
   man."

   Valentinus, falling in with these (remarks), has made a fundamental
   principle in his system "the King of all," whom Plato mentioned, and
   whom this heretic styles Pater, and Bythos, and Proarche [722] over the
   rest of the Æons. And when Plato uses the words, "what is second about
   things that are second," Valentinus supposes to be second all the Æons
   that are within the limit (of the Pleroma, as well as) the limit
   (itself). And when Plato uses the words, "what is third about what is
   third," he has (constituted as third) the entire of the arrangement
   (existing) outside the limit [723] and the Pleroma. And Valentinus has
   elucidated this (arrangement) very succinctly, in a psalm commencing
   from below, not as Plato does, from above, expressing himself thus: "I
   behold [724] all things suspended in air by spirit, and I perceive all
   things wafted by spirit; the flesh (I see) suspended from soul, but the
   soul shining out from air, and air depending from Æther, and fruits
   produced from Bythus, and the foetus borne from the womb." Thus
   (Valentinus) formed his opinion on such (points). Flesh, according to
   these (heretics), is matter which is suspended from the soul of the
   Demiurge. And soul shines out from air; that is, the Demiurge emerges
   from the spirit, (which is) outside the Pleroma. But air springs forth
   from Æther; that is, Sophia, which is outside (the Pleroma, is
   projected from the Pleroma) which is within the limit, and (from) the
   entire Pleroma (generally). And from Bythus fruits are produced; (that
   is,) the entire projection of the Æons is made from the Father. The
   opinions, then, advanced by Valentinus have been sufficiently declared.
   It remains for us to explain the tenets of those who have emanated from
   his school, though each adherent (of Valentinus) entertains different
   opinions. [725]
     

   [718] Cruice thinks that the following extract from Plato's epistles
   has been added by a second hand. [Cf. vol. iii. p. 181, this series.]

   [719] There are some verbal diversities between the texts of Plato and
   Hippolytus, which a reference will show (see Plat., Epist., t. ix. p.
   76, ed. Bekker).

   [720] Some forty lines that follow in Plato's letter are omitted here.

   [721] Here likewise there is another deficiency as compared with the
   original letter.

   [722] Miller's text is, kai pasi gen, etc. In the German and French
   edition of Hippolytus we have, instead of this, kai Proarchen. The
   latter word is introduced on the authority of Epiphanius and Theodoret.
   Bernays proposes Sigen, and Scott Plasten.  The Abbe Cruice considers
   Plasten an incongruous word as applied to the creation of spiritual
   beings.

   [723] The word "limit" occurs twice in this sentence, and Bunsen alters
   the second into "Pleroma," so that the words may be rendered thus:
   "Valentinus supposes to be second all the Æons that are within the
   Pleroma."

   [724] This is a Gnostic hymn, and is arranged metrically by Cruice, of
   which the following is a translation:-- All things whirled on by spirit
   I see, Flesh from soul depending, And soul from air forth flashing, And
   air from æther hanging, And fruits from Bythus streaming, And from womb
   the infant growing.

   [725] The text here is corrupt, but the above rendering follows the
   Abbe Cruice's version. Bunsen's emendation would, however, seem
   untenable.
     

   Chapter XXXIII.--Secundus' System of Æons; Epiphanes; Ptolemæus.

   A certain (heretic) Secundus, [726] born about the same time with
   Ptolemæus, expresses himself thus: (he says) that there is a right
   tetrad and a left tetrad,--namely, light and darkness.  And he affirms
   that the power which withdrew and laboured under deficiency, was not
   produced from the thirty Æons, but from the fruits of these. Some other
   (heretic), however--Epiphanes, a teacher among them--expresses himself
   thus: "The earliest originating principle was inconceivable, ineffable,
   and unnameable;" and he calls this Monotes. And (he maintains) that
   there co-exists with this (principle) a power which he denominates
   Henotes. This Henotes and this Monotes, not by projection (from
   themselves), sent forth a principle (that should preside) over all
   intelligibles; (and this was) both unbegotten and invisible, and he
   styles it a Monad. "With this power co-exists a power of the same
   essence, which very (power) I call Unity. These four powers sent forth
   the remainder of the projections of the Æons." But others, again,
   denominate the chief and originating Ogdoad, (which is) fourth (and)
   invisible, by the following names: first, Proarche; next, Anennoetus;
   third, Arrhetus; and fourth, Aoratus. And that from the first,
   Proarche, was projected by a first and fifth place, Arche; and from
   Anennoetus, by a second and sixth place, Acataleptus; and from
   Arrhetus, by a third and seventh place, Anonomastus; and from Aoratus,
   Agennetus, a complement of the first Ogdoad. They wish that these
   powers should exist before Bythus and Sige. Concerning, however, Bythus
   himself, there are many different opinions. Some affirm him to be
   unwedded, neither male nor female; but others (maintain) that Sige, who
   is a female, is present with him, and that this constitutes the first
   conjugal union.

   But the followers of Ptolemæus [727] assert that (Bythus) has two
   spouses, which they call likewise dispositions, viz., Ennoia and
   Thelesis (conception and volition). For first the notion was conceived
   of projecting anything; next followed, as they say, the will to do so.
   Wherefore also these two dispositions and powers--namely, Ennoia and
   Thelesis--being, as it were, mingled one with the other, there ensued a
   projection of Monogenes and Aletheia by means of a conjugal union. And
   the consequence was, that visible types and images of those two
   dispositions of the Father came forth from the invisible (Æons), viz.,
   from Thelema, Nous, and from Ennoia, Aletheia. And on this account the
   image of the subsequently generated Thelema is (that of a) male; but
   (the image) of the unbegotten Ennoia is (that of a) female, since
   volition is, as it were, a power of conception. For conception always
   cherished the idea of a projection, yet was not of itself at least able
   to project itself, but cherished the idea (of doing so). When, however,
   the power of volition (would be present), then it projects the idea
   which had been conceived.
     

   [726] Concerning Secundus and Epiphanes, see Irenæus, i. 11; Theodoret,
   Hær. Fab., i. 5-9; Epiphanius, xxxii. 1, 3, 4; Tertullian, Adv.
   Valent., c. xxxviii.; and St. Augustine, Hær., xi. Hippolytus, in his
   remarks on Secundus and Epiphanes, borrows from St. Irenæus.

   [727] Concerning Ptolemæus, see Irenæus, i. 12; Tertullian, De
   Præscript., c. xlix.; and Advers. Valent., c. viii.; Epiphanius, Hær.,
   xxxiii. 3-7; and Theodoret, Hæret. Fab., i. 8.
     

   Chapter XXXIV.--System of Marcus; A Mere Impostor; His Wicked Devices
   Upon the Eucharistic Cup.

   A certain other teacher among them, Marcus, [728] an adept in sorcery,
   carrying on operations [729] partly by sleight of hand and partly by
   demons, deceived many from time to time. This (heretic) alleged that
   there resided in him the mightiest power from invisible and unnameable
   places. And very often, taking the Cup, as if offering up the
   Eucharistic prayer, and prolonging to a greater length than usual the
   word of invocation, he would cause the appearance of a purple, and
   sometimes of a red mixture, so that his dupes imagined that a certain
   Grace descended and communicated to the potion a blood-red potency. The
   knave, however, at that time succeeded in escaping detection from many;
   but now, being convicted (of the imposture), he will be forced to
   desist from it. For, infusing secretly into the mixture some drug that
   possessed the power of imparting such a colour (as that alluded to
   above), uttering for a considerable time nonsensical expressions, he
   was in the habit of waiting, (in expectation) that the (drug),
   obtaining a supply of moisture, might be dissolved, and, being
   intermingled with the potion, might impart its colour to it. The drugs,
   however, that possess the quality of furnishing this effect we have
   previously mentioned in the book on magicians. [730] And here we have
   taken occasion to explain how they make dupes of many, and thoroughly
   ruin them. And if it should prove agreeable to them to apply their
   attention with greater accuracy to the statement made by us, they will
   become aware of the deceit of Marcus.
     

   [728] Concerning Marcus, see Irenæus, i. 12-18; Tertullian, Præscript.,
   c. l.; Epiphanius, Hær., xxxiv.; Theodoret, Hæret. Fab., i. 9; St.
   Augustine, Hær., c. xiv.; and St. Jerome's 29th Epistle.

   [729] energon: Bunsen reads dron, which has the same meaning. Cruice
   reads aioron, but makes no attempt at translation. Miller's reading is
   doron, which is obviously corrupt, but for which dolon has been
   suggested, and with good show of reason.

   [730] [The lost book upon the Witch of Endor, possibly.  "Against the
   Magi" is the title of the text, and is taken to refer to book iv. cap.
   xxviii. p. 35, supra: the more probable opinion.
     

   Chapter XXXV.--Further Acts of Jugglery on the Part of Marcus.

   And this (Marcus), infusing (the aforesaid) mixture into a smaller cup,
   was in the habit of delivering it to a woman to offer up the
   Eucharistic prayer, while he himself stood by, and held (in his hand)
   another empty (chalice) larger than that.  And after his female dupe
   had pronounced the sentence of Consecration, [731] having received (the
   cup from her), he proceeded to infuse (its contents) into the larger
   (chalice), and, pouring them frequently from one cup to the other, was
   accustomed at the same time to utter the following invocation: "Grant
   that the inconceivable and ineffable Grace which existed prior to the
   universe, may fill thine inner man, and make to abound in thee the
   knowledge of this (grace), as She disseminates the seed of the
   mustard-tree upon the good soil." And simultaneously pronouncing some
   such words as these, and astonishing both his female dupe and those
   that are present, he was regarded as one performing a miracle; while
   the larger was being filled from the smaller chalice, in such a way as
   that (the contents), being superabundant, flowed over. And the
   contrivance of this (juggler) we have likewise explained in the
   aforesaid (fourth) book, where we have proved that very many drugs,
   when mingled in this way with liquid substances, are endued with the
   quality of yielding augmentation, more particularly when diluted in
   wine. Now, when (one of these impostors) previously smears, in a
   clandestine manner, an empty cup with any one of these drugs, and shows
   it (to the spectators) as if it contained nothing, by infusing into it
   (the contents) from the other cup, and pouring them back again, the
   drug, as it is of a flatulent nature, is dissolved [732] by being
   blended with the moist substance. And the effect of this was, that a
   superabundance of the mixture ensued, and was so far augmented, that
   what was infused was put in motion, such being the nature of the drug.
   And if one stow away (the chalice) when it has been filled, (what has
   been poured into it) will after no long time return to its natural
   dimensions, inasmuch as the potency of the drug becomes extinct by
   reason of the continuance of moisture.  Wherefore he was in the habit
   of hurriedly presenting the cup to those present, to drink; but they,
   horrified at the same time, and eager (to taste the contents of the
   cup), proceeded to drink (the mixture), as if it were something divine,
   and devised by the Deity. [733]
     

   [731] Or, "had given thanks."

   [732] analuomenou:  some read anaduomenou, which is obviously
   untenable.

   [733] [Here was an awful travesty of the heresy of a later day which
   introduced "the miracle of Bolsena" and the Corpus-Christi celebration.
   See Robertson, Hist., vol. iii. p. 604.]
     

   Chapter XXXVI.--The Heretical Practices of the Marcites in Regard of
   Baptism.

   Such and other (tricks) this impostor attempted to perform. And so it
   was that he was magnified by his dupes, and sometimes he was supposed
   to utter predictions. But sometimes he tried to make others (prophesy),
   partly by demons carrying on these operations, and partly by practising
   sleight of hand, as we have previously stated. Hoodwinking therefore
   multitudes, he led on (into enormities) many (dupes) of this
   description who had become his disciples, by teaching them that they
   were prone, no doubt, to sin, but beyond the reach of danger, from the
   fact of their belonging to the perfect power, and of their being
   participators in the inconceivable potency. And subsequent to the
   (first) baptism, to these they promise another, which they call
   Redemption. And by this (other baptism) they wickedly subvert those
   that remain with them in expectation of redemption, as if persons,
   after they had once been baptized, could again obtain remission. Now,
   it is by means of such knavery as this that they seem to retain their
   hearers.  And when they consider that these have been tested, and are
   able to keep (secret the mysteries) committed unto them, they then
   admit them to this (baptism). They, however, do not rest satisfied with
   this alone, but promise (their votaries) some other (boon) for the
   purpose of confirming them in hope, in order that they may be
   inseparable (adherents of their sect). For they utter something in an
   inexpressible (tone of) voice, after having laid hands on him who is
   receiving the redemption. And they allege that they could not easily
   declare (to another) what is thus spoken unless one were highly tested,
   or one were at the hour of death, (when) the bishop comes and whispers
   (it) into the (expiring one's) ear. And this knavish device (is
   undertaken) for the purpose of securing the constant attendance upon
   the bishop of (Marcus') disciples, as individuals eagerly panting to
   learn what that may be which is spoken at the last, by (the knowledge
   of) which the learner will be advanced to the rank of those admitted
   into the higher mysteries. And in regard of these I have maintained a
   silence for this reason, lest at any time one should suppose that I was
   guilty of disparaging these (heretics).  For this does not come within
   the scope of our present work, only so far as it may contribute to
   prove from what source (the heretics) have derived the standing-point
   from which they have taken occasion to introduce the opinions advanced
   by them. [734]
     

   [734] [Bunsen (vol. i. p 72-75) makes useful comments.]
     

   Chapter XXXVII.--Marcus' System Explained by Irenæus; Marcus' Vision;
   The Vision of Valentinus Revealing to Him His System.

   For also the blessed presbyter Irenæus, having approached the subject
   of a refutation in a more unconstrained spirit, has explained such
   washings and redemptions, stating more in the way of a rough digest
   [735] what are their practices. (And it appears that some of the
   Marcosians,) on meeting with (Irenæus' work), deny that they have so
   received (the secret word just alluded to), but they have learned that
   always they should deny. Wherefore our anxiety has been more accurately
   to investigate, and to discover minutely what are the (instructions)
   which they deliver in the case of the first bath, styling it by some
   such name; and in the case of the second, which they denominate
   Redemption. But not even has this secret of theirs escaped (our
   scrutiny). For these opinions, however, we consent to pardon Valentinus
   and his school.

   But Marcus, imitating his teacher, himself also feigns a vision,
   imagining that in this way he would be magnified. For Valentinus
   likewise alleges that he had seen an infant child lately born; and
   questioning (this child), he proceeded to inquire who it might be. And
   (the child) replied, saying that he himself is the Logos, and then
   subjoined a sort of tragic legend; and out of this (Valentinus) wishes
   the heresy attempted by him to consist. Marcus, making a similar
   attempt [736] with this (heretic), asserts that the Tetrad came to him
   in the form of a woman,--since the world could not bear, he says, the
   male (form) of this Tetrad, and that she revealed herself who she was,
   and explained to this (Marcus) alone the generation of the universe,
   which she never had revealed to any, either of gods or of men,
   expressing herself after this mode: When first the self-existent
   Father, He who is inconceivable and without substance, He who is
   neither male nor female, willed that His own ineffability should become
   realized in something spoken, and that His invisibility should become
   realized in form, He opened His mouth, and sent forth similar to
   Himself a Logos. And this (Logos) stood by Him, and showed unto Him who
   he was, viz., that he himself had been manifested as a (realization in)
   form of the Invisible One. And the pronunciation of the name was of the
   following description.  He was accustomed to utter the first word of
   the name itself, which was Arche, and the syllable of this was
   (composed) of four [737] letters. Then he subjoined the second
   (syllable), and this was also (composed) of four letters.  Next he
   uttered the third (syllable), which was (composed) of ten letters; and
   he uttered the fourth (syllable), and this was (composed) of twelve
   letters. Then ensued the pronunciation of the entire name, (composed)
   of thirty letters, but of four syllables. And each of the elements had
   its own peculiar letters, and its own peculiar form, and its own
   peculiar pronunciation, as well as figures and images. And not one of
   these was there that beholds the form of that (letter) of which this
   was an element. And of course none of them could know the pronunciation
   of the (letter) next to this, but (only) as he himself pronounces it,
   (and that in such a way) as that, in pronouncing the whole (word), he
   supposed that he was uttering the entire (name).  For each of these
   (elements), being part of the entire (name), he denominates (according
   to) its own peculiar sound, as if the whole (of the word). And he does
   not intermit sounding until he arrived at the last letter of the last
   element, and uttered it in a single articulation. Then he said, that
   the restoration of the entire ensued when all the (elements), coming
   down into the one letter, sounded one and the same pronunciation, and
   an image of the pronunciation he supposed to exist when we
   simultaneously utter the word Amen. [738] And that these sounds are
   those which gave form to the insubstantial and unbegotten Æon, and that
   those forms are what the Lord declared to be angels--the (forms) that
   uninterruptedly behold the face of the Father.
     

   [735] Hippolytus has already employed this word, hadromesteron, in the
   Prooemium. It literally means, of strong or compact parts. Hippolytus,
   however, uses it in contrast to the expression leptomeres, in reference
   to his Summary of Heresies. Bunsen thinks that Hippolytus means to say
   that Irenæus expressed himself rather too strongly, and that the
   Marcosians, on meeting with Irenæus' assertions, indignantly repudiated
   them. Dr. Wordsworth translates hadromeros (in the Prooemium), "with
   rude generality,"--a rendering scarcely in keeping with the passage
   above.

   [736] The largest extract from Irenæus is that which follows--the
   explanation of the heresy of Marcus. From this to the end of book vi.
   occurs in Irenæus likewise. Hippolytus' text does not always accurately
   correspond with that of his master. The divergence, however, is
   inconsiderable, and may sometimes be traceable to the error of the
   transcriber.

   [737] Hippolytus uses two words to signify letters, stoicheion and
   gramma. The former strictly means an articulate sound as the basis of
   language or of written words, and the latter the sound itself when
   represented by a particular symbol or sign.

   [738] [Rev. iii. 14. A name of Christ.  This word is travestied as the
   name Logos also, most profanely.]
     

   Chapter XXXVIII.--Marcus' System of Letters.

   But the generic and expressed names of the elements he called Æons, and
   Logoi, and Roots, and Seeds, and Pleromas, and Fruits. (And he
   maintains) that every one of these, and what was peculiar to each, is
   perceived as being contained in the name of "Ecclesia." And the final
   letter of the last element sent forth its own peculiar articulation.
   And the sound of this (letter) came forth and produced, in accordance
   with images of the elements, its own peculiar elements. And from these
   he says that things existing here were garnished, and the things
   antecedent to these were produced. The letter itself certainly, of
   which the sound was concomitant with the sound below, he says, was
   received up by its own syllable into the complement of the entire
   (name); but that the sound, as if cast outside, remained below. And
   that the element itself, from which the letter along with its own
   pronunciation descended below, he says, is (composed) of thirty
   letters, and that each one of the thirty letters contains in itself
   other letters, by means of which the title of the letter is named. And
   again, that the other (letters) are named by different letters, and the
   rest by different (ones still). So that by writing down the letters
   individually, the number would eventuate in infinity. In this way one
   may more clearly understand what is spoken. The element Delta, (he
   says,) has five letters in itself, (viz.), Delta, and Epsilon, and
   Lambda, and Tau, and Alpha; and these very letters are (written) by
   means of other letters. If, therefore, the entire substance of the
   Delta eventuates in infinity, (and if) different letters invariably
   produce different letters, and succeed one another, by how much greater
   than that element is the more enormous sea [739] of the letters? And if
   one letter is thus infinite, behold the entire name's depth of the
   letters out of which the patient industry, nay, rather (I should say,)
   the vain toil of Marcus wishes that the Progenitor (of things) should
   consist! Wherefore also (he maintains) that the Father, who knew that
   He was inseparable from Himself, gave (this depth) to the elements,
   which he likewise denominates Æons. And he uttered aloud to each one of
   them its own peculiar pronunciation, from the fact that one could not
   pronounce the entire.
     

   [739] This is Duncker's emendation, suggested by Irenæus' text. Miller
   reads ton topon, which yields scarcely any meaning.
     

   Chapter XXXIX.--The Quaternion Exhibits "Truth."

   And (Marcus alleged) that the Quaternion, after having explained these
   things, spoke as follows: "Now, I wish also to exhibit to you Truth
   herself, for I have brought her down from the mansions above, in order
   that you may behold her naked, and become acquainted with her beauty;
   nay, also that you may hear her speak, and may marvel at her wisdom.
   Observe," says the Quaternion, "then, first, the head above, Alpha (and
   long) O; the neck, B and P[si]; shoulders, along with hands, G and
   C[hi]; breasts, Delta and P[hi]; diaphragm, [740] Eu; belly, Z and T;
   pudenda, Eta and S; thighs, T[h] and R; knees, Ip; calves, Ko; ankles,
   Lx[si]; feet, M and N." This is in the body of Truth, according to
   Marcus. This is the figure of the element; this the character of the
   letter. And he styles this element Man, and affirms it to be the source
   of every word, and the originating principle of every sound, and the
   realization in speech of everything that is ineffable, and a mouth of
   taciturn silence. And this is the body of (Truth) herself. But do you,
   raising aloft the conceiving power of the understanding, hear from the
   mouths of Truth (of) the Logos, who is Self-generator [741] and
   Progenitor. [742]
     

   [740] Hippolytus' text has been here corrected from that of Irenæus.

   [741] This is a correction from Progenitor, on the authority of Irenæus
   and Epiphanius.

   [742] Propatora:  Irenæus reads Patrodora, which is adopted by
   Schneidewin, and translated patrium.
     

   Chapter XL.--The Name of Christ Jesus.

   But, after uttering these words, (Marcus details) that Truth, gazing
   upon him, and opening her mouth, spoke the discourse (just-alluded to).
   And (he tells us) that the discourse became a name, and that the name
   was that which we know and utter, viz., Christ Jesus, and that as soon
   as she had named this (name) she remained silent. While Marcus,
   however, was expecting that she was about to say more, the Quaternion,
   again advancing into the midst, speaks as follows: "Thou didst regard
   as contemptible [743] this discourse which you have heard from the
   mouth of Truth. And yet this which you know and seem long since to
   possess is not the name; for you have merely the sound of it, but are
   ignorant of the power. For Jesus is a remarkable name, having six
   letters, [744] invoked [745] by all belonging to the called (of
   Christ); whereas the other (name, that is, Christ,) consists of many
   parts, and is among the (five) Æons of the Pleroma. (This name) is of
   another form and a different type, and is recognised by those
   existences who are connate with him, and whose magnitudes subsist with
   him continually.
     

   [743] The reading is doubtful. The translator adopts Scott's
   emendation.

   [744] [See note 1, p. 94 supra, on "Amen."  Comp. Irenæus, vol. i. p.
   393, this series. This name of Jesus does, indeed, run through all
   Scripture, in verbal and other forms; Gen. xlix. 18 and in Joshua, as a
   foreshadowing.]

   [745] Irenæus has "known."
     

   Chapter XLI.--Marcus' Mystic Interpretation of the Alphabet.

   Know, (therefore,) that these letters which with you are (reckoned at)
   twenty-four, are emanations from the three powers, and are
   representative [746] of those (powers) which embrace even the entire
   number of the elements. For suppose that there are some letters that
   are mute--nine of them--of Pater and Aletheia, from the fact that these
   are mute--that is, ineffable and unutterable. And (again, assume) that
   there are other (letters that are) semi-vowels--eight of them--of the
   Logos and of Zoe, from the fact that these are intermediate between
   consonants and vowels, and receive the emanation [747] of the (letters)
   above them, but the reflux of those below them. [748] And (likewise
   take for granted) that there are vowels--and these are seven--of
   Anthropos and Ecclesia, inasmuch as the voice of Anthropos proceeded
   forth, and imparted form to the (objects of the) universe. For the
   sound of the voice produced figure, and invested them with it. From
   this it follows that there are Logos and Zoe, which have eight
   (semi-vowels); and Anthropos and Ecclesia, which have seven (vowels);
   and Pater and Aletheia, which have nine (mutes). But from the fact that
   Logos wanted [749] (one of being an ogdoad), he who is in the Father
   was removed (from his seat on God's right hand), and came down (to
   earth). And he was sent forth (by the Father) to him from whom he was
   separated, for the rectification of actions that had been committed.
   (And his descent took place) in order that the unifying process, which
   is inherent in Agathos, of the Pleromas might produce in all the single
   power that emanates from all. And thus he who is of the seven (vowels)
   acquired the power of the eight [750] (semi-vowels); and there were
   produced three topoi, corresponding with the (three) numbers (nine,
   seven, and eight),--(these topoi) being ogdoads. And these three being
   added one to the other, exhibited the number of the twenty-four
   (letters). And (he maintains), of course, that the three
   elements,--(which he himself affirms to be (allied) with the three
   powers by conjugal union, and which (by this state of duality) become
   six, and from which have emanated the twenty-four elements,--being
   rendered fourfold by the Quaternion's ineffable word, produce the same
   number (twenty-four) with these. And these, he says, belong to
   Anonomastus. And (he asserts) that these are conveyed by the six powers
   into a similarity with Aoratus. And (he says) that there are six double
   letters of these elements, images of images, which, being reckoned
   along with the twenty-four letters, produce, by an analogical power,
   the number thirty.
     

   [746] eikonikas.  This is Irenæus' reading. Miller has eikonas
   (representations).

   [747] aporrhoian:  some read aporian, which is obviously erroneous.

   [748] hup' auta:  Irenæus reads huper auten, and Massuet hupenerthen.

   [749] The deficiency consisted in there not being three ogdoads. The
   sum total was twenty-four, but there was only one ogdoad--Logos and
   Zoe. The other two--Pater and Aletheia, and Anthropos and Ecclesia--had
   one above and one below an ogdoad.

   [750] ton okto has been substituted for to noeto, an obviously corrupt
   reading. The correction is supplied by Irenæus.
     

   Chapter XLII.--His System Applied to Explain Our Lord's Life and Death.

   And he says, as the result of this computation and that proportion,
   [751] that in the similitude of an image He appeared who after the six
   days Himself ascended the mountain a fourth person, and became the
   sixth. [752] And (he asserts) that He (likewise) descended and was
   detained by the Hebdomad, and thus became an illustrious Ogdoad. And He
   contains in Himself of the elements the entire number which He
   manifested, as He came to His baptism.  (And the symbol of
   manifestation was) the descent of the dove, which is O[mega] and Alpha,
   and which by the number manifested (by these is) 801. [753] And for
   this reason (he maintains) that Moses says that man was created on the
   sixth day. And (he asserts) that the dispensation of suffering (took
   place) on the sixth day, which is the preparation; (and so it was) that
   on this (day) appeared the last man for the regeneration of the first
   man. And that the beginning and end of this dispensation is the sixth
   hour, at which He was nailed to the (accursed) tree. For (he says) that
   perfect Nous, knowing the sixfold number to be possessed of the power
   of production and regeneration, manifested to the sons of light the
   regeneration that had been introduced into this number by that
   illustrious one who had appeared. Whence also he says that the double
   letters [754] involve the remarkable number. For the illustrious
   number, being intermingled with the twenty-four elements, produced the
   name (consisting) of the thirty letters.
     

   [751] Or, "economy."

   [752] Christ went up with the three apostles, and was therefore the
   fourth Himself; by the presence of Moses and Elias, He became the
   sixth:  Matt. xvii. 1; Mark ix. 2.

   [753] The Greek word for dove is peristera, the letters of which
   represent 801, as may be seen thus:-- p = 80 e = 5 r = 100 i = 10 s =
   200 t = 300 e = 5 r = 100 a = 1 ___ 801 This, therefore, is equipollent
   with Alpha and Omega, as a is equal to 1, and o to 800. [Stuff! Bunsen,
   very naturally, exclaims.]

   [754] grammata:  some read pragmata.
     

   Chapter XLIII--Letters, Symbols of the Heavens.

   He has, however, employed the instrumentality of the aggregate of the
   seven numbers, in order that the result of the self-devised (counsel)
   [755] might be manifested. Understand, he says, for the present, that
   remarkable number to be Him who was formed by the illustrious one, and
   who was, as it were, divided, and remained outside. And He, through
   both His Own power and wisdom, by means of the projection of Himself,
   imparted, in imitation of the seven powers, [756] animation to this
   world, so as to make it consist of seven powers, and constituted (this
   world) the soul of the visible universe. And therefore this one has
   resorted to such all operation as what was spontaneously undertaken by
   Himself; and these minister, [757] inasmuch as they are imitations of
   things inimitable, unto the intelligence of the Mother. And the first
   heaven sounds Alpha, [758] and the one after that E[psilon], and the
   third Eta, and the fourth, even that in the midst of the seven (vowels,
   enunciates) the power of Iota, and the fifth of O[micron], and the
   sixth of U[psilon], and the seventh and fourth from the central [759]
   one, O[mega]. And all the powers, when they are connected together in
   one, emit a sound, and glorify that (Being) from whom they have been
   projected. And the glory of that sound is transmitted upwards to the
   Progenitor. And furthermore, he says that the sound of this ascription
   of glory being conveyed to the earth, became a creator and producer of
   terrestrial objects. And (he maintains) that the proof of this (may be
   drawn) from the case of infants recently born, whose soul,
   simultaneously with exit from the womb utters similarly this sound of
   each one of the elements. As, then, he says, the seven powers glorify
   the Logos, so also does the sorrowing soul in babes (magnify Him).
   [760] And on account of this, he says, David likewise has declared,
   "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise."
   [761] And again, "The heavens declare the glory of God." [762] When,
   [763] however, the soul is involved in hardships, it utters no other
   exclamation than the O[mega], inasmuch as it is afflicted in order that
   the soul above, becoming aware of what is akin to herself (below), may
   send down one to help this (earthly soul).
     

   [755] Supplied from Irenæus.

   [756] This should be altered into Hebdomad if we follow Irenæus.

   [757] tade diakonei. This is the text of Irenæus, and corrects the
   common reading, ta di eikonon.

   [758] phthengetai (Irenæus). The common reading is phainetai.

   [759] mesou: in Irenæus we have merous.

   [760] Irenæus has the sentence thus: "so also the soul in babes,
   lamenting and bewailing Marcus, glorifies him."

   [761] Ps. viii. 2.

   [762] Ps. xix. 1.

   [763] Hippolytus here omits some passages which are to be found in
   Irenæus.
     

   Chapter XLIV.--Respecting the Generation of the Twenty-Four Letters.

   And so far for these points. Respecting, however, the generation of the
   twenty-four elements, he expresses himself thus: that Henotes coexists
   with Monotes, and that from these issue two projections, viz., Monas
   and Hen, and that these being added together [764] become four, for
   twice two are four. And again, the two and four (projections) being
   added together, manifested the number six; and these six made fourfold,
   produce the twenty-four forms. [765] And these are the names of the
   first tetrad, and they are understood as Holy of Holies, and cannot be
   expressed and they are recognised by the Son alone. These the Father
   knows which they are. Those names which with Him are pronounced in
   silence and with faith, are Arrhetus and Sige, Pater and Aletheia. And
   of this tetrad the entire number is (that) of twenty-four letters. For
   Arrhetus has seven elements, Sige five, and Pater five, and Aletheia
   seven. [766] And in like manner also (is it with) the second tetrad;
   (for) Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia, exhibited the same number
   of elements. And (he says) that the expressed name--(that is, Jesus)
   [767] --of the Saviour consists of six letters, but that His ineffable
   [768] name, according to the number of the letters, one by one, [769]
   consists of twenty-four elements, but Christ a Son of twelve. And (he
   says) that the ineffable (name) in Christ consists of thirty letters,
   and this exists, according to the letters which are in Him, the
   elements being counted one by one. For the (name) Christ [770] consists
   of eight elements; for Chi [771] consists of three, and R[ho] of two,
   and EI of two, and I[ota], of four, S[igma] of five, and T[au] of
   three, and OU of two, and San of three. Thus the ineffable name in
   Christ consists, they allege, of thirty letters. And they assert that
   for this reason He utters the words, "I am Alpha and Omega," displaying
   the dove, which (symbolically) has this number, which is eight hundred
   and one. [772]
     

   [764] Literally, "being twice two:" some for ousai read ousiai.
   Irenæus has epi duo ousai, i.e., "which being (added) into two."

   [765] Hippolytus has only the word "twenty-four," to which Schneidewin
   supplies "letters," and Irenæus "forms," as given above. Hippolytus
   likewise omits the word "produced," which Irenæus supplies. The text of
   the latter is tas eikositessaras apekusan morphas.

   [766] Irenæus adds, "which being added together, I mean the twice five
   and twice seven, complete the number of the twenty-four (forms)."

   [767] The parenthetical words had fallen into a wrong part of the
   sentence, and are placed here by Schneidewin.

   [768] This is a correction for "expressed" from Irenæus.  Marcus
   observes the distinction afterwards.

   [769] kata hen grammaton.  The ms.. has engramaton.  Irenæus omits
   these words.

   [770] This entire sentence is wanting in Irenæus.

   [771] Corrected from Chri, which is in the ms.

   [772] Irenæus has the passage thus: "And for this reason He says that
   He is Alpha and Omega, that He may manifest the dove, inasmuch as this
   bird (symbolically) involves this number (801)." See a previous note in
   chap. xlii. p. 95, supra.
     

   Chapter XLV.--Why Jesus is Called Alpha.

   Now Jesus possesses this ineffable generation. For from the mother of
   the universe, I mean the first tetrad, proceeded forth, in the manner
   of a daughter, the second tetrad. And it became an ogdoad, from which
   proceeded forth the decade; and thus was produced ten, and next
   eighteen. The decade, therefore, coming in along with the ogdoad, and
   rendering it tenfold, produced the number eighty; and again making
   eighty tenfold, generated the number eight hundred. [773] And so it is
   that the entire number of letters that proceeded forth from ogdoad into
   decade is eight hundred and eighty-eight, which is Jesus; for the name
   Jesus, according to the number in letters, is eight hundred and
   eighty-eight. Now likewise the Greek alphabet has eight monads and
   eight decades, and eight hecatontads; and these exhibit the calculated
   sum of eight hundred and eighty-eight, that is, Jesus, who consists of
   all numbers. And that on this account He is called Alpha (and Omega),
   indicating His generation (to be) from all. [774]
     

   [773] Part of this sentence is supplied from Irenæus.

   [774] Hippolytus here omits the following sentence found in Irenæus:
   "And again thus--of the first quarternion, when added into itself, in
   accordance with a progression of number, appeared the number ten, and
   so forth."
     

   Chapter XLVI.--Marcus' Account of the Birth and Life of Our Lord.

   But concerning the creation of this (Jesus), he expresses himself thus:
   That powers emanating from the second tetrad fashioned Jesus, who
   appeared on earth, and that the angel Gabriel [775] filled the place of
   the Logos, and the Holy Spirit that of Zoe, and the "Power of the
   Highest" [776] that of Anthropos, and the Virgin that of Ecclesia.
   [777] And so it was, in Marcus' system, that the man (who appeared) in
   accordance with the dispensation was born through Mary. [778] And when
   He came to the water, (he says) that He descended like a dove upon him
   who had ascended above and filled the twelfth number. And in Him
   resides the seed of these, that is, such as are sown along with Him,
   and that descend with (Him), and ascend with (Him). And that this power
   which descended upon Him, he says, is the seed of the Pleroma, which
   contains in itself both the Father and the Son, and the unnameable
   power of Sige, which is recognised through these and all the Æons. And
   that this (seed) is the spirit which is in Him and spoke in Him through
   the mouth of the Son, the confession of Himself as Son of man, and of
   His being one who would manifest the Father; (and that) when this
   spirit came down upon Jesus, He was united with Him. The Saviour, who
   was of the dispensation, he says, destroyed death, whereas He made
   known (as) the Father Christ (Jesus). He says that Jesus, therefore, is
   the name of the man of the dispensation, and that it has been set forth
   for the assimilation and formation of Anthropos, who was about to
   descend upon Him; and that when He had received Him unto Himself, He
   retained possession of Him. And (he says) that He was Anthropos, (that)
   He (was) Logos, (that) He (was) Pater, and Arrhetus, and Sige, and
   Aletheia, and Ecclesia, and Zoe.
     

   [775] Luke i. 26-38.

   [776] Or, "of the Son," an obvious mistake.

   [777] Irenæus has, "And the Virgin exhibited the place of Ecclesia."

   [778] Irenæus adds, "whom the Father of the universe selected, for
   passage through the womb, by means of the Logos, for recognition of
   Himself."
     

   Chapter XLVII.--The System of Marcus Shown to Be that of Pythagoras, by
   Quotations from the Writings of Marcus' Followers.

   I trust, therefore, that as regards these doctrines it is obvious to
   all possessed of a sound mind, that (these tenets) are unauthoritative,
   and far removed from the knowledge that is in accordance with Religion,
   and are mere portions of astrological discovery, and the arithmetical
   art of the Pythagoreans. And this assertion, ye who are desirous of
   learning shall ascertain (to be true, by a reference to the previous
   books, where,) amongst other opinions elucidated by us, we have
   explained these doctrines likewise. In order, however, that we may
   prove it a more clear statement, viz., that these (Marcosians) are
   disciples not of Christ but of Pythagoras, I shall proceed to explain
   those opinions that have been derived (by these heretics) from
   Pythagoras concerning the meteoric (phenomena) of the stars [779] as
   far as it is possible (to do so) by an epitome.

   Now the Pythagoreans make the following statements: that the universe
   consists of a Monad and Duad, and that by reckoning from a monad as far
   as four they thus generate a decade. And again, [780] a duad coming
   forth as far as the remarkable (letter),--for instance, two and four
   and six,--exhibited the (number) twelve. And again, if we reckon from
   the duad to the decade, thirty is produced; and in this are comprised
   the ogdoad, and decade, and dodecade. And therefore, on account of its
   having the remarkable (letter), the dodecade has concomitant [781] with
   it a remarkable passion. [782] And for this reason (they maintain) that
   when an error had arisen respecting the twelfth number, the sheep
   skipped from the flock and wandered away; [783] for that the apostasy
   took place, they say, in like manner from the decade. And with a
   similar reference to the dodecade, they speak of the piece of money
   which, on losing, a woman, having lit a candle, searched for
   diligently. (And they make a similar application) of the loss
   (sustained) in the case of the one sheep out of the ninety and nine;
   and adding these one into the other, they give a fabulous account of
   numbers. And in this way, they affirm, when the eleven is multiplied
   into nine, that it produces the number ninety and nine; and on this
   account that it is said that the word Amen embraces the number
   ninety-nine. And in regard of another number they express themselves in
   this manner: that the letter Eta along with the remarkable one
   constitutes an ogdoad, as it is situated in the eighth place from
   Alpha. Then, again, computing the number of these elements without the
   remarkable (letter), and adding them together up to Eta, they exhibit
   the number thirty. For any one beginning from the Alpha [784] to the
   Eta will, after subtracting the remarkable (letter), discover the
   number of the elements to be the number thirty. Since, therefore, the
   number thirty is unified from the three powers; when multiplied thrice
   into itself it produced ninety, for thrice thirty is ninety, (and this
   triad when multiplied into itself produced nine). In this way the
   Ogdoad brought forth the number ninety-nine from the first Ogdoad, and
   Decade, and Dodecade. And at one time they collect the number of this
   (trio) into an entire sum, and produce a triacontad; whereas at another
   time they subtract twelve, and reckon it at eleven. And in like manner,
   (they subtract) ten and make it nine. And connecting these one into the
   other, and multiplying them tenfold, they complete the number
   ninety-nine. Since, however, the twelfth Æon, having left the eleven
   (Æons above), and departing downwards, withdrew, they allege that even
   this is correlative (with the letters). For the figure of the letters
   teaches (us as much). For L is placed eleventh of the letters, and this
   L is the number thirty. And (they say) that this is placed according to
   an image of the dispensation above; since from Alpha, irrespective of
   the remarkable (letter), the number of the letters themselves, added
   together up to L, according to the augmentation of the letters with the
   L itself, produces the number ninety-nine. But that the L, situated in
   the eleventh (of the alphabet), came down to search after the number
   similar to itself, in order that it might fill up the twelfth number,
   and that when it was discovered it was filled up, is manifest from the
   shape itself of the letter. For Lambda, when it attained unto, as it
   were, the investigation of what is similar to itself, and when it found
   such and snatched it away, filled up the place of the twelfth, the
   letter M, which is composed of two Lambdas. And for this reason (it
   was) that these (adherents of Marcus), through their knowledge, avoid
   the place of the ninety-nine, that is, the Hysterema, a type of the
   left hand, [785] and follow after the one which, added to ninety-nine,
   they say was transferred to his own right hand.
     

   [779] Cruice thinks that for stars we should read "numbers," but gives
   no explanation of the meaning of meteora. This word, as applied to
   numbers, might refer to "the astrological phenomena" deducible by means
   of numerical calculations.

   [780] A comparison of Hippolytus with Irenæus, as regards what follows,
   manifests many omissions in the former.

   [781] Following Irenæus, the passage would be rendered thus:  "And
   therefore, on account of its having the remarkable (letter) concomitant
   with it, they style the dodecade a remarkable passion." Massuet, in his
   Annotations on Irenæus, gives the following explanation of the above
   statement, which is made by Hippolytus likewise. From the twelfth
   number, by once abstracting the remarkable (number), which does not
   come into the order and number of the letters, eleven letters remain.
   Hence in the dodecade, the pathos, or what elsewhere the heretics call
   the "Hysterema," is a defect of one letter. And this is a symbol of the
   defect or suffering which, upon the withdrawal of one Æon, happened
   unto the last dodecade of Æons.

   [782] Hippolytus' statement is less copious and less clear than that of
   Irenæus, who explains the defect of the letter to be symbolical of an
   apostasy of one of the Æons, and that this one was a female.

   [783] Luke xv. 4-10.

   [784] Marcus' explanation of this, as furnished by Irenæus, is more
   copious than Hippolytus'.

   [785] The allusion here seems to be to the habit among the ancients of
   employing the fingers for counting, those of the left hand being used
   for all numbers under 100, and those of the right for the numbers above
   it. To this custom the poet Juvenal alludes, when he says of Nestor:--
   Atque suos jam dextera computat annos. That is, that he was one hundred
   years old.
     

   Chapter XLVIII.--Their Cosmogony Framed According to These Mystic
   Doctrines of Letters.

   And by the Mother, they allege, were created first the four elements,
   which, they say, are fire, water, earth, air; and these have been
   projected as an image of the tetrad above; and reckoning the energies
   of these--for instance, as hot, cold, moist, dry--they assert that they
   accurately portray the Ogdoad.  And next they compute ten powers thus.
   (There are, they say,) seven orbicular bodies, which they likewise call
   heavens. There is next a circle containing these within its compass,
   and this also they name an eighth heaven: and in addition to these,
   they affirm the existence of both a sun and moon. And these being ten
   in number, they say, are images of the invisible decade that (emanated)
   from Logos and Zoe.  (They affirm,) however, that the dodecade is
   indicated by what is termed the zodiacal circle. For these twelve
   zodiacal signs, they say, most evidently shadowed forth [786] the
   daughter of Anthropos and Ecclesia, namely the Dodecade. And since, he
   says, the upper heaven has been united from an opposite direction to
   the revolutionary motion, which is most rapid, of the entire (of the
   signs); and since (this heaven) within its cavity retards, and by its
   slowness counterpoises, the velocity of those (signs), so that in
   thirty years it accomplishes its circuit from sign to sign,--they
   therefore assert that this (heaven) is an image of Horos, who encircles
   the mother of these, who has thirty names. And, again, (they affirm)
   that the moon, which traverses the heaven in thirty days, by reason of
   (these) days portrays the number of the Æons. And (they say) that the
   sun, performing its circuit, and terminating its exact return to its
   first position in its orbit in twelve months, manifests the dodecade.
   And also (they say) that the days themselves, involving the measure of
   twelve hours, constitute a type of the empty [787] dodecade; and that
   the circumference of the actual zodiacal circle consists of three
   hundred and sixty degrees, and that each zodiacal sign possesses thirty
   divisions.  In this way, therefore, even by means of the circle, they
   maintain that the image is preserved [788] of the connection of the
   twelve with the thirty. [789] But, moreover, alleging that the earth
   was divided into twelve regions, and that according to each particular
   region it receives one power by the latter's being sent down from the
   heavens, and that it produces children corresponding in likeness [790]
   unto the power which transmitted (the likeness) by emanation; (for this
   reason) they assert that earth is a type of the Dodecade above.
     

   [786] Or, "sketched out" (Irenæus).

   [787] Or, "radiant."

   [788] Or, "measured."

   [789] Massuet gives the following explanation: The sun each day
   describes a circle which is divided into twelve parts of 30 degrees
   each, and consists of 360 degrees. And as for each of the hours, where
   days and nights are equal, 15 degrees are allowed, it follows that in
   two hours, that is, in the twelfth part of a day, the sun completes a
   progress of 30 degrees.

   [790] Or, "of the same substance."
     

   Chapter XLIX.--The Work of the Demiurge Perishable.

   And in addition to these (points, they lay down) that the Demiurge of
   the supernal Ogdoad, desirous of imitating the indefinite, and
   everlasting, and illimitable (one), and (the one) not subject to the
   condition of time; and (the Demiurge) not being able to represent the
   stability [791] and eternity of this (Ogdoad), on account of his being
   the fruit of the Hysterema, to this end appointed times, and seasons,
   and numbers, measuring many years in reference to the eternity of this
   (Ogdoad), thinking by the multitude of times to imitate its
   indefiniteness.  And here they say, when Truth eluded his pursuit, that
   Falsehood followed close upon him; and that on account of this, when
   the times were fulfilled, his work underwent dissolution.
     

   [791] Or, "blamelessness."
     

   Chapter L.--Marcus and Colarbasus Refuted by Irenæus.

   These assertions, then, those who are of the school of Valentinus
   advance concerning both the creation and the universe, in each case
   propagating opinions still more empty. [792] And they suppose this to
   constitute productiveness (in their system), if any one in like manner,
   making some greater discovery, will appear to work wonders. And
   finding, (as they insinuate,) each of the particulars of Scripture to
   accord with the aforesaid numbers, they (attempt to) criminate Moses
   and the prophets, alleging that these speak allegorically of the
   measures of the Æons. And inasmuch as these statements are trifling and
   unstable, it does not appear to me expedient to bring them before (the
   reader. This, however, is the less requisite,) as now the blessed
   presbyter [793] Irenæus has powerfully and elaborately refuted the
   opinions of these (heretics). And to him we are indebted for a
   knowledge of their inventions, (and have thereby succeeded in) proving
   that these heretics, appropriating these opinions from the Pythagorean
   philosophy, and from over-spun theories of the astrologers, cast an
   imputation upon Christ, as though He had delivered these (doctrines).
   But since I suppose that the worthless opinions of these men have been
   sufficiently explained, and that it has been clearly proved whose
   disciples are Marcus and Colarbasus, who were successors of the school
   of Valentinus, let us see what statement likewise Basilides advances.
     

   [792] Or, "strange."

   [793] [The Apostle John delights to call himself a presbyter, and St.
   Peter claims to be co-presbyter with the elders whom he exhorts.  The
   Johannean school of primitive theologians seem to love this expression
   pre-eminently. It was almost as little specific in the primitive age as
   that of pastor or minister in our own.]