The Epistle of Ignatius to Mary at Neapolis, Near Zarbus.
     

   Ignatius, who is also called Theaphorus, to her who has obtained mercy
   through the grace of the most high God the Father, and Jesus Christ the
   Lord, who died for us, to Mary, my daughter, most faithful, worthy of
   God, and bearing Christ [in her heart], wishes abundance of happiness
   in God.
     

  Chapter I.--Acknowledgment of her excellence and wisdom.

   Sight indeed is better than writing, inasmuch as, being one [1375] of
   the company of the senses, it not only, by communicating proofs of
   friendship, honours him who receives them, but also, by those which it
   in turn receives, enriches the desire for better things. But the second
   harbour of refuge, as the phrase runs, is the practice of writing,
   which we have received, as a convenient haven, by thy faith, from so
   great a distance, seeing that by means of a letter we have learned the
   excellence that is in thee. For the souls of the good, O thou wisest
   [1376] of women! resemble fountains of the purest water; for they
   allure by their beauty passers-by to drink of them, even though these
   should not be thirsty. And thy intelligence invites us, as by a word of
   command, to participate in those divine draughts which gush forth so
   abundantly in thy soul.
     

   [1375] Literally, "a part."

   [1376] Literally, "all-wise."
     

  Chapter II.--His own condition.

   But I, O thou blessed woman, not being now so much my own master as in
   the power of others, am driven along by the varying wills of many
   adversaries, [1377] being in one sense in exile, in another in prison,
   and in a third in bonds. But I pay no regard to these things. Yea, by
   the injuries inflicted on me through them, I acquire all the more the
   character of a disciple, that I may attain to Jesus Christ. May I enjoy
   the torments which are prepared for me, seeing that "the sufferings of
   this present time are not worthy [to be compared] with the glory which
   shall be revealed in us." [1378]
     

   [1377] Literally, "by the many wills of the adversaries."

   [1378] Rom. viii. 18.
     

  Chapter III.--He had complied with her request.

   I have gladly acted as requested in thy letter, [1379] having no doubt
   respecting those persons whom thou didst prove to be men of worth. For
   I am sure that thou barest testimony to them in the exercise of a godly
   judgment, [1380] and not through the influence of carnal favour. And
   thy numerous quotations of Scripture passages exceedingly delighted me,
   which, when I had read, I had no longer a single doubtful thought
   respecting the matter. For I did not hold that those things were simply
   to be glanced over by my eyes, of which I had received from thee such
   an incontrovertible demonstration. May I be in place of thy soul,
   because thou lovest Jesus, the Son of the living God. Wherefore also He
   Himself says to thee, "I love them that love Me; and those that seek Me
   shall find peace." [1381]
     

   [1379] Literally, "I have gladly fulfilled the things commanded by thee
   in the letter."

   [1380] Literally, "by a judgment of God."

   [1381] Prov. viii. 17 (loosely quoted from LXX.).
     

  Chapter IV.--Commendation and exhortation.

   Now it occurs to me to mention, that the report is true which I heard
   of thee whilst thou wast at Rome with the blessed father [1382] Linus,
   whom the deservedly-blessed Clement, a hearer of Peter and Paul, has
   now succeeded. And by this time thou hast added a hundred-fold to thy
   reputation; and may thou, O woman! still further increase it. I greatly
   desired to come unto you, that I might have rest with you; but "the way
   of man is not in himself." [1383] For the military guard [under which I
   am kept] hinders my purpose, and does not permit me to go further. Nor
   indeed, in the state I am now in, can I either do or suffer anything.
   Wherefore deeming the practice of writing the second resource of
   friends for their mutual encouragement, I salute thy sacred soul,
   beseeching of thee to add still further to thy vigour. For our present
   labour is but little, while the reward which is expected is great.
     

   [1382] The original is papa, [common to primitive bishops.]

   [1383] Jer. x. 23.
     

  Chapter V.--Salutations and good wishes.

   Avoid those that deny the passion of Christ, and His birth according to
   the flesh: and there are many at present who suffer under this disease.
   But it would be absurd to admonish thee on other points, seeing that
   thou art perfect in every good work and word, and able also to exhort
   others in Christ. Salute all that are like-minded with thyself, and who
   hold fast to their salvation in Christ. The presbyters and deacons, and
   above all the holy Hero, salute thee. Cassian my host salutes thee, as
   well as my sister, his wife, and their very dear children. May the Lord
   sanctify thee for evermore in the enjoyment both of bodily and
   spiritual health, and may I see thee in Christ obtaining the crown!
