The Pastor
     

  Book Third.--Similitudes.
     
     

    Similitude First. [244]

      As in This World We Have No Abiding City, We Ought to Seek One to Come.

   He says to me, "You know that you who are the servants of God dwell in
   a strange land; for your city is far away from this one. [245] If,
   then," he continues, "you know your city in which you are to dwell, why
   do ye here provide lands, and make expensive preparations, and
   accumulate dwellings and useless buildings? He who makes such
   preparations for this city cannot return again to his own. Oh foolish,
   and unstable, and miserable man! Dost thou not understand that all
   these things belong to another, and are under the power of another? For
   the Lord of this city will say, I do not wish thee to dwell in my city;
   but depart from this city, because thou obeyest not my laws.' Thou,
   therefore, although having fields and houses, and many other things,
   when cast out by him, what wilt thou do with thy land, and house, and
   other possessions which thou hast gathered to thyself? For the Lord of
   this country justly says to thee, Either obey my laws or depart from my
   dominion.' What, then, dost thou intend to do, having a law in thine
   own city, on account of thy lands, and the rest of thy possessions?
   [246] Thou shalt altogether deny thy law, and walk according to the law
   of this city. See lest it be to thy hurt to deny thy law; [247] for if
   thou shalt desire to return to thy city, thou wilt not be received,
   because thou hast denied the law of thy city, but wilt be excluded from
   it. Have a care, therefore: as one living in a foreign land, make no
   further preparations for thyself than such merely as may be sufficient;
   and be ready, when the master of this city shall come to cast thee out
   for disobeying his law, to leave his city, and to depart to thine own,
   and to obey thine own law without being exposed to annoyance, but in
   great joy. Have a care, then, ye who serve the Lord, and have Him in
   your heart, that ye work the works of God, remembering His commandments
   and promises which He promised, and believe that He will bring them to
   pass if His commandments be observed. Instead of lands, therefore, buy
   afflicted souls, according as each one is able, and visit [248] widows
   and orphans, and do not overlook them; and spend your wealth and all
   your preparations, which ye received from the Lord, upon such lands and
   houses. For to this end did the Master make you rich, that you might
   perform these services unto Him; and it is much better to purchase such
   lands, and possessions, and houses, as you will find in your own city,
   when you come to reside in it. This is a noble and sacred expenditure,
   attended neither with sorrow nor fear, but with joy. Do not practice
   the expenditure of the heathen, [249] for it is injurious to you who
   are the servants of God; but practice an expenditure of your own, in
   which ye can rejoice; and do not corrupt [250] nor touch what is
   another's nor covet it, for it is an evil thing to covet the goods of
   other men; but work thine own work, and thou wilt be saved."
     

   [244] [We have seen in Justin and Irenaeus what seem to us an
   overstrained allegorizing, and more will be encountered in Origen. On
   this whole subject, however, as it struck the Oriental and primitive
   instincts, take the following very illustrative remarks, attributed to
   Hartley of Winwich:-- "Nature, in its proper order, is the book of God,
   and exhibits spiritual things in material forms. The knowledge of
   correspondences being so little understood, is one main cause of the
   obscurity of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, which were chiefly
   written by the rules of this science: and not Scripture alone, but man,
   also, as an image of the spiritual and natural worlds, contains in
   himself the correspondences of both: of the former, in his interior,
   and of the latter in his exterior or bodily, part, and so is called the
   microcosm, or little world." Such texts as Heb. ix. 24, 1 Cor. ii. 13,
   14, go far to explain to us the childlike faith of the Fathers. See
   note on Leighton's St. Peter, p. 238, vol. iii. Ed. Of William West,
   B.A. 1870.]

   [245] [Heb. xiii. 14 is the text of this very beautiful chapter. But he
   original Greek of Phil. iii. 20 seems, also, to be in the author's
   mind. St. Paul addressed it to the church of a Roman "colony," whose
   citizenship was not Macedonian but Roman: hence its beautiful
   propriety.]

   [246] This sentence may be also rendered thus, giving heneken the
   meaning of "as regards," "respecting"--a usual enough signification:
   "What then do you intend to do, as you have a law in your own city
   regarding your lands and the rest of your possessions?" The Vatican
   punctuates the passage so that it runs as follows: "What then will you
   do, who have a law in your own city? Will you, on account of your land,
   or any other of your preparations, be able to deny your law?" The
   Vatican also omits several clauses that are in the Greek, down to "for
   if thou shalt deny, and shalt desire to return," etc.

   [247] See ... law, omitted in Lips. [The threskeia of Jas. i. 27.]

   [248] The Vatican has: "Acquit widows, and do justice to orphans."

   [249] The Vatican renders, "Do not covet, therefore, the riches of the
   heathen." [Here follows, in the Lambeth ms., an allusion to Luke xix.
   15, which Wake renders: "Trade with your own riches." See, also, Luke
   xii. 33.]

   [250] The Vatican, rendering paracharassete, adulterare, proceeds as if
   the reference were to adultery. "Neither touch another man's wife, nor
   lust after her, but desire your own work, and you will be saved."
     

    Similitude Second.

      As the Vine is Supported by the Elm, So is the Rich Man Helped by the
      Prayer of the Poor.

   As I was walking in the field, and observing an elm and vine, and
   determining in my own mind respecting them and their fruits, the
   Shepherd appears to me, and says, "What is it that you are thinking
   about the elm and vine?" "I am considering," I reply, "that they become
   each other exceedingly well." "These two trees," he continues, "are
   intended as an example for the servants of God." "I would like to
   know," said I, "the example which these trees you say, are intended to
   teach." "Do you see," he says, "the elm and the vine?" "I see them
   sir," I replied. "This vine," he continued, "produces fruit, and the
   elm is an unfruitful tree; but unless the vine be trained upon the elm,
   it cannot bear much fruit when extended at length upon the ground;
   [251] and the fruit which it does bear is rotten, because the plant is
   not suspended upon the elm. When, therefore, the vine is cast upon the
   elm, it yields fruit both from itself and from the elm. You see,
   moreover, that the elm also produces much fruit, not less than the
   vine, but even more; because," [252] he continued, "the vine, when
   suspended upon the elm, yields much fruit, and good; but when thrown
   upon the ground, what it produces is small and rotten. This similitude,
   [253] therefore, is for the servants of God--for the poor man and for
   the rich." "How so, sir?" said I; "explain the matter to me." "Listen,"
   he said: "The rich man has much wealth, but is poor in matters relating
   to the Lord, because he is distracted about his riches; and he offers
   very few confessions and intercessions to the Lord, and those which he
   does offer are small and weak, and have no power above. But when the
   rich man refreshes [254] the poor, and assists him in his necessities,
   believing that what he does to the poor man will be able to find its
   reward with God--because the poor man is rich in intercession and
   confession, and his intercession has great power with God--then the
   rich man helps the poor in all things without hesitation; and the poor
   man, being helped by the rich, intercedes for him, giving thanks to God
   for him who bestows gifts upon him. And he still continues to interest
   himself zealously for the poor man, that his wants may be constantly
   supplied. For he knows that the intercession of the poor man is
   acceptable and influential [255] with God. Both, accordingly,
   accomplish their work. The poor man makes intercession; a work in which
   he is rich, which he received from the Lord, and with which he
   recompenses the master who helps him. And the rich man, in like manner,
   unhesitatingly bestows upon the poor man the riches which he received
   from the Lord. And this is a great work, and acceptable before God,
   because he understands the object of his wealth, and has given to the
   poor of the gifts of the Lord, and rightly discharged his service to
   Him. [256] Among men, however, the elm appears not to produce fruit,
   and they do not know nor understand that if a drought come, the elm,
   which contains water, nourishes the vine; and the vine, having an
   unfailing supply of water, yields double fruit both for itself and for
   the elm. So also poor men interceding with the Lord on behalf of the
   rich, increase their riches; and the rich, again, aiding the poor in
   their necessities, satisfy their souls. Both, therefore, are partners
   in the righteous work. He who does these things shall not be deserted
   by God, but shall be enrolled in the books of the living. Blessed are
   they who have riches, and who understand that they are from the Lord.
   [For they who are of that mind will be able to do some good. [257] ]"
     

   [251] The Vatican reads: "Unless this vine be attached to the elm, and
   rest upon it, it cannot bear much fruit. For, lying upon the ground, it
   produces bad fruit, because it is not suspended upon the elm."

   [252] The Vatican here makes Hermas interrupt the Shepherd, and ask,
   "How greater than the vine?"

   [253] [Based on Jas. i. 9-11, 27, and ii. 1-9: introducing the heathen
   world to just ideas of human brotherhood, and the mutual relations of
   the poor and the rich.]

   [254] The translation of the text is based on the Palatine. Lips.
   Reads: "When the rich man fills out upon the poor." Hilgenfeld amends
   this: "When the rich man recovers breath upon the poor." Neither gives
   sense. The Æthiopic has: "But if the rich man lean on the poor;" and
   the Greek of Hilgenfeld might mean: "When the rich man recovers his
   breath by leaning on the poor." The Vatican is quite different: "When,
   therefore, the rich man helps the poor in those things which he needs,
   the poor man prays to the Lord for the rich man, and God bestows all
   blessings upon the rich man, because the poor man is rich in prayer,
   and his prayer has great merit with God. Then the rich man accordingly
   assists the poor man's things, because he feels that he is fully heard
   (exaudiri) by the Lord; and the more willingly and unhesitatingly does
   he give him every help, and takes care that he wants for nothing. The
   poor man gives thanks to God for the rich man, because they do their
   duty in respect to the Lord (a Domino)."

   [255] [I note this use of the word "influential," because it was
   formerly denounced as an Americanism.]

   [256] [Luke xii. 42.]

   [257] The sentence in brackets is not in Lips. It is taken from Pal.
     

    Similitude Third.

      As in Winter Green Trees Cannot Be Distinguished from Withered, So in This
      World Neither Can the Just from the Unjust.

   He showed me many trees having no leaves, but withered, as it seemed to
   me; for all were alike. And he said to me, "Do you see those trees?" "I
   see, sir," I replied, "that all are alike, and withered." He answered
   me, and said, "These trees which you see are those who dwell in this
   world." "Why, then, sir," I said, "are they withered, as it were, and
   alike?" [258] "Because," he said, "neither are the righteous manifest
   in this life, nor sinners, but they are alike; for this life is a
   winter to the righteous, and they do not manifest themselves, because
   they dwell with sinners: for as in winter trees that have cast their
   leaves are alike, and it is not seen which are dead and which are
   living, so in this world neither do the righteous show themselves, nor
   sinners, but all are alike one to another." [259]
     

   [258] The Vatican renders this thus: "Why do they resemble those that
   are, as it were, withered?"

   [259] [Matt. xiii. 29.]
     

    Similitude Fourth.

      As in Summer Living Trees are Distinguished from Withered by Fruit and
      Living Leaves, So in the World to Come the Just Differ from the Unjust in
      Happiness.

   He showed me again many trees, some budding, and others withered. And
   he said to me, "Do you see these trees?" "I see, sir," I replied, "some
   putting forth buds, and others withered." "Those," he said, "which are
   budding are the righteous who are to live in the world to come; for the
   coming world is the summer [260] of the righteous, but the winter of
   sinners. When, therefore, the mercy of the Lord shines forth, then
   shall they be made manifest who are the servants of God, and all men
   shall be made manifest. For as in summer the fruits of each individual
   tree appear, and it is ascertained of what sort they are, so also the
   fruits of the righteous shall be manifest, and all who have been
   fruitful in that world shall be made known. [261] But the heathen and
   sinners, like the withered trees which you saw, will be found to be
   those who have been withered and unfruitful in that world, and shall be
   burnt as wood, and [so] made manifest, because their actions were evil
   during their lives. For the sinners shall be consumed because they
   sinned and did not repent, and the heathen shall be burned because they
   knew not Him who created them. Do you therefore bear fruit, that in
   that summer your fruit may be known. And refrain from much business,
   and you will never sin: for they who are occupied with much business
   commit also many sins, being distracted about their affairs, and not at
   all serving their Lord. [262] How, then," he continued, "can such a one
   ask and obtain anything from the Lord, if he serve Him not? They who
   serve Him shall obtain their requests, but they who serve Him not shall
   receive nothing. And in the performance even of a single action a man
   can serve the Lord; for his mind will not be perverted from the Lord,
   but he will serve Him, having a pure mind. If, therefore, you do these
   things, you shall be able to bear fruit for the life to come. And every
   one who will do these things shall bear fruit."
     

   [260] Summer. Throne.--Lips. [Rom. viii. 22-24.]

   [261] The Vatican has, "And all the merry and joyful shall be restored
   in that age."

   [262] [1 Cor. vii. 30-35; Rom. xii. 11.]
     

    Similitude Fifth.

      Of True Fasting and Its Reward: Also of Purity of Body.

      Chap. I.

   While fasting and sitting on a certain mountain, and giving thanks to
   the Lord for all His dealings with me, I see the Shepherd sitting down
   beside me, and saying, "Why have you come hither [so] early in the
   morning?" "Because, sir," I answered, "I have a station." [263] "What
   is a station?" he asked. "I am fasting, sir," I replied. "What is this
   fasting," he continued, "which you are observing?" "As I have been
   accustomed, sir," I reply, "so I fast." "You do not know," he says,
   "how to fast unto the Lord: this useless fasting which you observe to
   Him is of no value." "Why, sir," I answered, "do you say this?" "I say
   to you," he continued, "that the fasting which you think you observe is
   not a fasting. But I will teach you what is a full and acceptable
   fasting to the Lord. Listen," he continued: "God does not desire such
   an empty fasting. [264] For fasting to God in this way you will do
   nothing for a righteous life; but offer to God a fasting of the
   following kind: Do no evil in your life, and serve the Lord with a pure
   heart: keep His commandments, walking in His precepts, and let no evil
   desire arise in your heart; and believe in God. If you do these things,
   and fear Him, and abstain from every evil thing, you will live unto
   God; and if you do these things, you will keep a great fast, and one
   acceptable before God."

      Chap. II.

   "Hear the similitude which I am about to narrate to you relative to
   fasting. A certain man had a field and many slaves, and he planted a
   certain part of the field with a vineyard, [265] and selecting a
   faithful and beloved and much valued slave, he called him to him, and
   said, Take this vineyard which I have planted, and stake [266] it until
   I come, and do nothing else to the vineyard; and attend to this order
   of mine, and you shall receive your freedom from me.' And the master of
   the slave departed to a foreign country. And when he was gone, the
   slave took and staked the vineyard; and when he had finished the
   staking of the vines, he saw that the vineyard was full of weeds. He
   then reflected, saying, I have kept this order of my master: I will dig
   up the rest of this vineyard, and it will be more beautiful when dug
   up; and being free of weeds, it will yield more fruit, not being choked
   by them.' He took, therefore, and dug up the vineyard, and rooted out
   all the weeds that were in it. And that vineyard became very beautiful
   and fruitful, having no weeds to choke it. And after a certain time the
   master of the slave and of the field returned, and entered into the
   vineyard. And seeing that the vines were suitably supported on stakes,
   and the ground, moreover, dug up, and all the weeds rooted out, and the
   vines fruitful, he was greatly pleased with the work of his slave. And
   calling his beloved son who was his heir, and his friends who were his
   councillors, he told them what orders he had given his slave, and what
   he had found performed. And they rejoiced along with the slave at the
   testimony which his master bore to him. And he said to them, I promised
   this slave freedom if he obeyed the command which I gave him; and he
   has kept my command, and done besides a good work to the vineyard, and
   has pleased me exceedingly. In return, therefore, for the work which he
   has done, I wish to make him co-heir with my son, because, having good
   thoughts, he did not neglect them, but carried them out.' With this
   resolution of the master his son and friends were well pleased, viz.,
   that the slave should be co-heir with the son. After a few days the
   master made a feast, [267] and sent to his slave many dishes from his
   table. And the slave receiving the dishes that were sent him from his
   master, took of them what was sufficient for himself, and distributed
   the rest among his fellow-slaves. And his fellow-slaves rejoiced to
   receive the dishes, and began to pray for him, that he might find still
   greater favour with his master for having so treated them. His master
   heard all these things that were done, and was again greatly pleased
   with his conduct. And the master again calling together his friends and
   his son, reported to them the slave's proceeding with regard to the
   dishes which he had sent him. And they were still more satisfied that
   the slave should become co-heir with his son."

      Chap. III.

   I said to him, "Sir, I do not see the meaning of these similitudes, nor
   am I able to comprehend them, unless you explain them to me." "I will
   explain them all to you," he said, "and whatever I shall mention in the
   course of our conversations I will show you. [Keep the commandments of
   the Lord, and you will be approved, and inscribed amongst the number of
   those who observe His commands.] And if you do any good beyond what is
   commanded by God, [268] you will gain for yourself more abundant glory,
   and will be more honoured by God than you would otherwise be. If,
   therefore, in keeping the commandments of God, you do, in addition,
   these services, you will have joy if you observe them according to my
   command." I said to him, "Sir, whatsoever you enjoin upon me I will
   observe, for I know that you are with me." "I will be with you," he
   replied, "because you have such a desire for doing good; and I will be
   with all those," he added, "who have such a desire. This fasting," he
   continued, "is very good, provided the commandments of the Lord be
   observed. Thus, then, shall you observe the fasting which you intend to
   keep. [269] First of all, [270] be on your guard against every evil
   word, and every evil desire, and purify your heart from all the
   vanities of this world. If you guard against these things, your fasting
   will be perfect. And you will do also as follows. [271] Having
   fulfilled what is written, in the day on which you fast you will taste
   nothing but bread and water; and having reckoned up the price of the
   dishes of that day which you intended to have eaten, you will give it
   to a widow, or an orphan, or to some person in want, and thus you will
   exhibit humility of mind, so that he who has received benefit from your
   humility may fill his own soul, and pray for you to the Lord. If you
   observe fasting, as I have commanded you, your sacrifice will be
   acceptable to God, and this fasting will be written down; and the
   service thus performed is noble, and sacred, and acceptable to the
   Lord. These things, therefore, shall you thus observe with your
   children, and all your house, and in observing them you will be
   blessed; and as many as hear these words and observe them shall be
   blessed; and whatsoever they ask of the Lord they shall receive."

      Chap. IV.

   I prayed him much that he would explain to me the similitude of the
   field, and of the master of the vineyard, and of the slave who staked
   the vineyard, and of the stakes, and of the weeds that were plucked out
   of the vineyard, and of the son, and of the friends who were
   fellow-councillors, for I knew that all these things were a kind of
   parable. And he answered me, and said, "You are exceedingly persistent
   [272] with your questions. You ought not," he continued, "to ask any
   questions at all; for if it is needful to explain anything, it will be
   made known to you." I said to him, "Sir, whatsoever you show me, and do
   not explain, I shall have seen to no purpose, not understanding its
   meaning. In like manner, also, if you speak parables to me, and do not
   unfold them, I shall have heard your words in vain." And he answered me
   again, saying, "Every one who is the servant of God, and has his Lord
   in his heart, asks of Him understanding, and receives it, and opens up
   every parable; and the words of the Lord become known to him which are
   spoken in parables. [273] But those who are weak and slothful in
   prayer, hesitate to ask anything from the Lord; but the Lord is full of
   compassion, and gives without fail to all who ask Him. But you, having
   been strengthened by the holy Angel, [274] and having obtained from Him
   such intercession, and not being slothful, why do not you ask of the
   Lord understanding, and receive it from Him?" I said to him, "Sir,
   having you with me, I am necessitated to ask questions of you, for you
   show me all things, and converse with me; but if I were to see or hear
   these things without you, I would then ask the Lord to explain them."

      Chap. V.

   "I said to you a little ago," he answered, "that you were cunning and
   obstinate in asking explanations of the parables; but since you are so
   persistent, I shall unfold to you the meaning of the similitudes of the
   field, and of all the others that follow, that you may make them known
   to every one. [275] Hear now," he said, "and understand them. The field
   is this world; and the Lord of the field is He who created, and
   perfected, and strengthened all things; [and the son is the Holy
   Spirit; [276] ] and the slave is the Son of God; and the vines are this
   people, whom He Himself planted; and the stakes are the holy angels of
   the Lord, who keep His people together; and the weeds that were plucked
   out of the vineyard are the iniquities of God's servants; and the
   dishes which He sent Him from His table are the commandments which He
   gave His people through His Son; and the friends and fellow-councillors
   are the holy angels who were first created; and the Master's absence
   from home is the time that remains until His appearing." I said to him,
   "Sir, all these are great, and marvellous, and glorious things. Could
   I, therefore," I continued, "understand them? No, nor could any other
   man, even if exceedingly wise. Moreover," I added, "explain to me what
   I am about to ask you." "Say what you wish," he replied. "Why, sir," I
   asked, "is the Son of God in the parable in the form of a slave?"

      Chap. VI.

   "Hear," he answered: "the Son of God is not in the form [277] of a
   slave, but in great power and might." "How so, sir?" I said; "I do not
   understand." "Because," he answered, "God planted the vineyard, that is
   to say, He created the people, and gave them to His Son; and the Son
   appointed His angels over them to keep them; and He Himself purged away
   their sins, having suffered many trials and undergone many labours, for
   no one is able to dig without labour and toil. He Himself, then, having
   purged away the sins of the people, showed them the paths of life [278]
   by giving them the law which He received from His Father. [You see," he
   said, "that He is the Lord of the people, having received all authority
   from His Father. [279] ] And why the Lord took His Son as councillor,
   and the glorious angels, regarding the heirship of the slave, listen.
   The holy, pre-existent Spirit, that created every creature, God made to
   dwell in flesh, which He chose. [280] This flesh, accordingly, in which
   the Holy Spirit dwelt, was nobly subject to that Spirit, walking
   religiously and chastely, in no respect defiling the Spirit; and
   accordingly, after living [281] excellently and purely, and after
   labouring and co-operating with the Spirit, and having in everything
   acted vigorously and courageously along with the Holy Spirit, He
   assumed it as a partner with it. For this conduct [282] of the flesh
   pleased Him, because it was not defiled on the earth while having the
   Holy Spirit. He took, therefore, as fellow-councillors His Son and the
   glorious angels, in order that this flesh, which had been subject to
   the body without a fault, might have some place of tabernacle, and that
   it might not appear that the reward [of its servitude had been lost
   [283] ], for the flesh that has been found without spot or defilement,
   in which the Holy Spirit dwelt, [will receive a reward [284] ]. You
   have now the explanation [285] of this parable also."

      Chap. VII.

   "I rejoice, sir," I said, "to hear this explanation." "Hear," again he
   replied: "Keep this flesh pure and stainless, that the Spirit which
   inhabits it may bear witness to it, and your flesh may be justified.
   See that the thought never arise in your mind that this flesh of yours
   is corruptible, and you misuse it by any act of defilement. If you
   defile your flesh, you will also defile the Holy Spirit; and if you
   defile your flesh [and spirit], you will not live." [286] "And if any
   one, sir," I said, "has been hitherto ignorant, before he heard these
   words, how can such a man be saved who has defiled his flesh?"
   "Respecting former sins [287] of ignorance," he said, "God alone is
   able to heal them, for to Him belongs all power. [But be on your guard
   now, and the all-powerful and compassionate God will heal former
   transgressions [288] ], if for the time to come you defile not your
   body nor your spirit; for both are common, and cannot be defiled, the
   one without the other: keep both therefore pure, and you will live unto
   God."
     

   [263] [This anachronism betrays the later origin of "The Pastor." The
   Pauline Hermas would not have used this technical term. These fasts
   were very early fixed by canon for Wednesdays and Fridays. See Canon
   lxix. of canons called "Apostolical;" also Bingham, book xiii. cap. 9,
   and this volume, p. 34, note 4.]

   [264] [See cap. iii. of this similitude.]

   [265] The Vatican adds, "for his successors."

   [266] i.e., attach the vines to stakes.

   [267] The Vatican adds, "Having called together his friends." [The
   gospel parables of the vineyard, and of the sower, and of the man
   travelling into a far country, are here reflected passim. I cannot but
   refer to a parable which greatly resembles this, and is yet more
   beautiful, occurring in Mrs. Sherwood's Stories on the Catechism
   (Fijou), a book for children. It is not unworthy of Bunyan.]

   [268] [To read into this passage the idea of "supererogatory merit" is
   an unpardonable anachronism. (Compare Command. iv. 4.) The writer
   everywhere denies human merit, extols mercy, and imputes good works to
   grace. He has in view St. Paul's advice (1 Cor. vii. 25-28), or our
   blessed Lord's saying (Matt. xix. 12). The abuse of such Scriptures
   propped up a false system (2 Pet. iii. 16) after it had been invented
   by Pelagians and monastic enthusiasts. But it has no place in the mind
   of Hermas, nor in the mind of Christ.]

   [269] [Thus he does not object to the "station," if kept with
   evangelical acts of devotion and penitence. Isa. lviii. 5-8.]

   [270] Pseudo-Athanasius gives this paragraph as follows: "First of all
   be on your guard to fast from every evil word and evil report, and
   purify your heart from every defilement and revenge, and base
   covetousness. And on the day on which you fast, be content with bread,
   and herbs, and water, giving thanks to God. And having calculated the
   amount of the cost of the meal which you intended to have eaten on that
   day, give it to a widow, or an orphan, or to some one in want, so that,
   having clearly filled his own soul, he shall pray to the Lord on your
   behalf. If you therefore perform your fasting as I enjoined you, your
   sacrifice will be acceptable before the Lord, and inscribed in the
   heavens in the day of the requital of the good things that have been
   prepared for the righteous."

   [271] [Note this detailed account of primitive fasting (2 Cor. vi. 5,
   ix. 27, xi. 27). Amid all the apostle's sufferings and dying daily, he
   adds fastings to involuntary hunger and thirst.]

   [272] Literally, "self-willed." (authades).

   [273] [Matt. xiii. 11; Jas. i. 5.]

   [274] [Luke. xxii. 43.]

   [275] [Part of the commission again.]

   [276] This clause occurs only in the Vatican. It does not occur in
   Lips., Pal., or in the Æth.

   [277] [Phil. ii. 7. But no longer is He such.]

   [278] [Heb. i. 3; Ps. xvi. 11]

   [279] The sentence in brackets is omitted in Lips. And Æth., occurs in
   Vat. And Pal.

   [280] This passage varies in each of the forms in which it has come
   down, and is corrupt in most, if not in all. The Vatican (Lat.) has,
   "Because the messenger hears the Holy Spirit, which was the first of
   all that was poured (infusus) into a body in which God might dwell. For
   understanding (intellectus) placed it in a body as seemed proper to
   Him." The Pal. reads: "For that Holy Spirit which was created pure
   [first] of all in a body in which it might dwell, God made and
   appointed a chosen body which pleased Him." The Æth. reads: "The Holy
   Spirit, who created all things, dwelt in a body in which He wished to
   dwell." [See Grabe's collation and emendation here, in Wake's
   translation.]

   [281] The Vatican renders this sentence: "This body, therefore, into
   which the Holy Spirit was led, was subject to that Spirit, walking
   rightly, modestly, and chastely, and did not at all defile that Spirit.
   Since, then, that body had always obeyed the Holy Spirit, and had
   laboured rightly and chastely with it, and had not at any time given
   way, that wearied body passed its time as a slave; but having strongly
   approved itself along with the Holy Spirit, it was received unto God."
   The Palatine is similar. The Æth. reads: "That body served well in
   righteousness and purity, nor did it ever defile that Spirit, and it
   became His partner, since that body pleased God."

   [282] poreia. Vatican, potens cursus.

   [283] The passages within brackets are omitted by Lips. and Æth.

   [284] The passages within brackets are omitted by Lips. and Æth.

   [285] [If the reader feels that the explanation itself needs to be
   explained, let him attribute it to the confused and inaccurate state of
   the text. Grabe says emphatically, that "the created Spirit of Christ
   as a man and not the Holy Ghost, the third person of the Trinity," is
   spoken of in this chapter chiefly. The apparent confusion of words and
   phrases must be the result of ignorant copying. It is a sufficient
   answer to certain German critics to cite the providential approval of
   Athanasius, a fact of the utmost moment. Nobody doubts that Athanasius
   was sensitive to any discoloration of the Nicene Faith. In the text of
   Hermas, therefore, as it was in his copy, there could have been nothing
   heretical, or favouring heresy. That Hermas was an artist, and
   purposely gave his fiction a very primitive air, is evident. He fears
   to name the Scriptures he quoted, lest any one should doubt their use,
   in the days of Clement, in the Western churches.]

   [286] [1 Cor. iii. 16, 17. Owen, On the Spirit, passim. Ambiguities,
   cap. ii.]

   [287] [Acts xvii. 30.]

   [288] Omitted in Lips. Æth. has simply, "But be on your guard now."
     

    Similitude Sixth.

      Of the Two Classes of Voluptuous Men, and of Their Death, Falling Away,
      and the Duration of Their Punishment.

      Chap. I.

   Sitting in my house, and glorifying the Lord for all that I had seen,
   and reflecting on the commandments, that they are excellent, and
   powerful, and glorious, and able to save a man's soul, I said within
   myself, "I shall be blessed if I walk in these commandments, and every
   one who walks in them will be blessed." While I was saying these words
   to myself, I suddenly see him sitting beside me, and hear him thus
   speak: "Why are you in doubt about the commandments which I gave you?
   They are excellent: have no doubt about them at all, but put on faith
   in the Lord, and you will walk in them, for I will strengthen you in
   them. These commandments are beneficial to those who intend to repent:
   for if they do not walk in them, their repentance is in vain. You,
   therefore, who repent cast away the wickedness of this world which
   wears you out; and by putting on all the virtues of a holy life, you
   will be able to keep these commandments, and will no longer add to the
   number of your sins. Walk, [289] therefore, in these commandments of
   mine, and you will live unto God. All these things have been spoken to
   you by me." And after he had uttered these words, he said to me, "Let
   us go into the fields, and I will show you the shepherds of the
   flocks." "Let us go, sir," I replied. And we came to a certain plain,
   and he showed me a young man, a shepherd, clothed in a suit of garments
   of a yellow colour: and he was herding very many sheep, and these sheep
   were feeding luxuriously, as it were, and riotously, and merrily
   skipping hither and thither. The shepherd himself was merry, because of
   his flock; and the appearance of the shepherd was joyous, and he was
   running about amongst his flock. [And other sheep I saw rioting and
   luxuriating in one place, but not, however, leaping about. [290] ]

      Chap. II.

   And he said to me, "Do you see this shepherd?" "I see him, sir," I
   said. "This," he answered, "is the angel [291] of luxury and deceit: he
   wears out the souls of the servants of God, and perverts them from the
   truth, deceiving them with wicked desires, through which they will
   perish; for they forget the commandments of the living God, and walk in
   deceits and empty luxuries; and they are ruined by the angel, some
   being brought to death, others to corruption." [292] I said to him,
   "Sir, I do not know the meaning of these words, to death, and to
   corruption.'" "Listen," he said. "The sheep which you saw merry and
   leaping about, are those which have torn themselves away from God for
   ever, and have delivered themselves over to luxuries and deceits [293]
   [of this world. Among them there is no return to life through
   repentance, because they have added to their other sins, and blasphemed
   the name of the Lord. Such men therefore, are appointed unto death.
   [294] And the sheep which you saw not leaping, but feeding in one
   place, are they who have delivered themselves over to luxury and
   deceit], but have committed no blasphemy against the Lord. These have
   been perverted from the truth: among them there is the hope of
   repentance, by which it is possible to live. Corruption, then, has a
   hope of a kind of renewal, [295] but death has everlasting ruin." Again
   I went forward a little way, and he showed me a tall shepherd, somewhat
   savage in his appearance, clothed in a white goatskin, and having a
   wallet on his shoulders, and a very hard staff with branches, and a
   large whip. And he had a very sour look, so that I was afraid of him,
   so forbidding was his aspect. This shepherd, accordingly, was receiving
   the sheep from the young shepherd, those, viz., that were rioting and
   luxuriating, but not leaping; and he cast them into a precipitous
   place, full of thistles and thorns, so that it was impossible to
   extricate the sheep from the thorns and thistles; but they were
   completely entangled amongst them. These, accordingly, thus entangled,
   pastured amongst the thorns and thistles, and were exceedingly
   miserable, being beaten by him; and he drove them hither and thither,
   and gave them no rest; and, altogether, these sheep were in a wretched
   plight.

      Chap. III.

   Seeing them, therefore, so beaten and so badly used, I was grieved for
   them, because they were so tormented, and had no rest at all. And I
   said to the Shepherd who talked with me, "Sir, who is this shepherd,
   who is so pitiless and severe, and so completely devoid of compassion
   for these sheep?" "This," he replied, "is the angel of punishment;
   [296] and he belongs to the just angels, and is appointed to punish. He
   accordingly takes those who wander away from God, and who have walked
   in the desires and deceits of this world, and chastises them as they
   deserve with terrible and diverse punishments." "I would know, sir," I
   said, "Of what nature are these diverse tortures and punishments?"
   "Hear," he said, "the various tortures and punishments. The tortures
   are such as occur during life. [297] For some are punished with losses,
   others with want, others with sicknesses of various kinds, and others
   with all kinds of disorder and confusion; others are insulted by
   unworthy persons, and exposed to suffering in many other ways: for
   many, becoming unstable in their plans, try many things, and none of
   them at all succeed, and they say they are not prosperous in their
   undertakings; and it does not occur to their minds that they have done
   evil deeds, but they blame the Lord. [298] When, therefore, they have
   been afflicted with all kinds of affliction, then are they delivered
   unto me for good training, and they are made strong in the faith of the
   Lord; and [299] for the rest of the days of their life they are subject
   to the Lord with pure hearts, and are successful in all their
   undertakings, obtaining from the Lord everything they ask; and then
   they glorify the Lord, that they were delivered to me, and no longer
   suffer any evil."

      Chap. IV.

   I said to him, "Sir, explain this also to me." "What is it you ask?" he
   said. "Whether, sir," I continued, "they who indulge in luxury, and who
   are deceived, are tortured for the same period of time that they have
   indulged in luxury and deceit?" He said to me, "They are tortured in
   the same manner." [300] ["They are tormented much less, sir," I
   replied; [301] ] "for those who are so luxurious and who forget God
   ought to be tortured seven-fold." He said to me "You are foolish, and
   do not understand the power of torment." "Why, sir," I said, "if I had
   understood it, I would not have asked you to show me." "Hear," he said,
   "the power of both. The time of luxury and deceit is one hour; but the
   hour of torment is equivalent to thirty days. If, accordingly, a man
   indulge in luxury for one day, and be deceived and be tortured for one
   day, the day of his torture is equivalent to a whole year. For all the
   days of luxury, therefore, there are as many years of torture to be
   undergone. You see, then," he continued, "that the time of luxury and
   deceit is very short, [302] but that of punishment and torture long."

      Chap. V.

   "Still," I said, "I do not quite understand about the time of deceit,
   and luxury, and torture; explain it to me more clearly." He answered,
   and said to me, "Your folly is persistent; and you do not wish to
   purify your heart, and serve God. Have a care," he added, "lest the
   time be fulfilled, and you be found foolish. Hear now," he added, "as
   you desire, that you may understand these things. He who indulges in
   luxury, and is deceived for one day, and who does what he wishes, is
   clothed with much foolishness, and does not understand the act which he
   does until the morrow; for he forgets what he did the day before. For
   luxury and deceit have no memories, on account of the folly with which
   they are clothed; but when punishment and torture cleave to a man for
   one day, he is punished and tortured for a year; for punishment and
   torture have powerful memories. While tortured and punished, therefore,
   for a whole year, he remembers at last [303] his luxury and deceit, and
   knows that on their account he suffers evil. Every man, therefore, who
   is luxurious and deceived is thus tormented, because, although having
   life, they have given themselves over to death." "What kinds of luxury,
   sir," I asked, "are hurtful?" "Every act of a man which he performs
   with pleasure," he replied, "is an act of luxury; for the
   sharp-tempered man, when gratifying his tendency, indulges in luxury;
   and the adulterer, and the drunkard, and the back-biter, and the liar,
   and the covetous man, and the thief, and he who does things like these,
   gratifies his peculiar propensity, and in so doing indulges in luxury.
   All these acts of luxury are hurtful to the servants of God. On account
   of these deceits, therefore, do they suffer, who are punished and
   tortured. And there are also acts of luxury which save men; for many
   who do good indulge in luxury, being carried away by their own
   pleasure: [304] this luxury, however, is beneficial to the servants of
   God, and gains life for such a man; but the injurious acts of luxury
   before enumerated bring tortures and punishment upon them; and if they
   continue in them and do not repent, they bring death upon themselves."
     

   [289] The Vatican has a sentence before this: "For if you sin not
   afterwards, you will greatly fall away from your former
   [transgressions]."

   [290] Found only in Pseudo-Athanasius. It occurs in none of the
   translations.

   [291] [The use of the word "angel," here, may possibly coincide with
   that in the Apocalypse, rebuking an unfaithful and luxurious pastor,
   like the angel of Sardis (Rev. iii. 1-5). The "yellow" raiment may be
   introduced as a contrast to the words, "thou has a few names even in
   Sardis which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with
   me in white."]

   [292] kataphthoran, translated in Pal. And Vat. by defectio, apostasy,
   as departure from goodness and truth. The Æthiopic has "ruin."

   [293] Of ... deceit, omitted in Lips. Our translation is made from the
   Vat.

   [294] Pseudo-Athanasius has, "of such men the life is death."

   [295] Pseudo-Athanasius has, "Corruption, therefore, has a hope of
   resurrection up to a certain point." [Death here must mean final
   apostasy (Heb. vi. 4-6, x. 26-31, xii. 15-17). But a certain
   death-in-life, which is not final, is instanced in Rev. iii. 1; note
   also 1 John iii. 14, 15, v. 16, 17.]

   [296] [The idea is, the minister of discipline, as St. Ambrose is
   represented with a scourge in his hand. The Greek (ek ton angelon ton
   dikaion) favours the idea that faithful pastors are here
   symbolized,--just stewards and righteous men.]

   [297] biotikai. The Vatican and Pal. render this, "the various
   punishments and tortures which men suffer daily in their lives."
   Pseudo-Athanasius has: "For when they revolt from God, thinking to be
   in rest and in wealth, then they are punished, some meeting with
   losses," etc. [1 Tim. i. 20. Remedial discipline is thus spoken of, 1
   Cor. v. 5.]

   [298] Pseudo-Athanasius has: "And they cannot bear for the rest of
   their days to turn and serve the Lord with a pure heart. But if they
   repent and become sober again, then they understand that they were not
   prosperous on account of their evil deeds; and so they glorify the
   Lord, because He is a just Judge, and because they suffered justly, and
   were punished (epaideuthesan) according to their deeds."

   [299] The Vatican inserts the following sentence before this: "And when
   they begin to repent of their sins, then the works in which they have
   wickedly exercised themselves arise in their hearts; and then they give
   honour to God, saying that He is a just Judge, and that they have
   deservedly suffered everything according to their deeds." So does Pal.
   The Æthiopic becomes very condensed in this portion. [Note this class
   of offenders, having suffered remedial chastisement, are not delivered
   over the Satan finally, but "delivered unto me (the angel of
   repentance) for good training."]

   [300] tropon. The Vat. and Pal. have, "for the same time" (per idem
   tempus).

   [301] Omitted in Lips.

   [302] Pseudo-Athanasius has "nothing" (ouden) instead of elachistos.

   [303] pote. [The pleasures of sin are "for a season" (Heb. xi. 25), at
   most: impenitence is the "treasuring up of wrath against the day of
   wrath" (Rom. ii. 5).]

   [304] [Ps. iv. 6, 7, cxix. 14, lxxxiv. 10. Dr. Doddridge's epigram on
   Dum Vivimus Vivamus will be brought to mind.]
     

    Similitude Seventh.

      They Who Repent Must Bring Forth Fruits Worthy of Repentance.

   After a few days I saw him in the same plain where I had also seen the
   shepherds; and he said to me, "What do you wish with me?" I said to
   him, "Sir, that you would order the shepherd who punishes to depart out
   of my house, because he afflicts me exceedingly." "It is necessary," he
   replied, "that you be afflicted; for thus," he continued, "did the
   glorious angel command concerning you, as he wishes you to be tried."
   "What have I done which is so bad, sir," I replied, "that I should be
   delivered over to this angel?" "Listen," he said: "Your sins are many,
   but not so great as to require that you be delivered over to this
   angel; but your household has committed great iniquities and sins, and
   the glorious angel has been incensed at them on account of their deeds;
   and for this reason he commanded you to be afflicted for a certain
   time, that they also might repent, and purify themselves from every
   desire of this world. When, therefore, they repent and are purified,
   then the angel of punishment will depart." I said to him, "Sir, if they
   have done such things as to incense the glorious angel against them,
   yet what have I done?" He replied, "They cannot be afflicted at all,
   unless you, the head of the house, be afflicted: for when you are
   afflicted, of necessity they also suffer affliction; but if you are in
   comfort, they can feel no affliction." "Well, sir," I said, "they have
   repented with their whole heart." "I know, too," he answered, "that
   they have repented with their whole heart: do you think, however, that
   the sins of those who repent are remitted? [305] Not altogether, but he
   who repents must torture his own soul, and be exceedingly humble in all
   his conduct, and be afflicted with many kinds of affliction; and if he
   endure the afflictions that come upon him, He who created all things,
   and endued them with power, will assuredly have compassion, and will
   heal him; and this will He do when He sees the heart of every penitent
   pure from every evil thing: [306] and it is profitable for you and for
   your house to suffer affliction now. But why should I say much to you?
   You must be afflicted, as that angel of the Lord commanded who
   delivered you to me. And for this give thanks to the Lord, because He
   has deemed you worthy of showing you beforehand this affliction, that,
   knowing it before it comes, you may be able to bear it with courage."
   [307] I said to him, "Sir, be thou with me, and I will be able to bear
   all affliction." "I will be with you," he said, "and I will ask the
   angel of punishment to afflict you more lightly; nevertheless, you will
   be afflicted for a little time, and again you will be re-established in
   your house. Only continue humble, and serve the Lord in all purity of
   heart, you and your children, and your house, and walk in my commands
   which I enjoin upon you, and your repentance will be deep and pure; and
   if you observe these things with your household, every affliction will
   depart from you. [308] And affliction," he added, "will depart from all
   who walk in these my commandments."
     

   [305] The Vat. and Pal. have protinus, "immediately." [Wake adopts this
   reading, which appears to be required by the context.]

   [306] The Lips. has lost here a few words, which are supplied from the
   Latin translations. [Mal. iii. 3; Isa. i. 22; Ps. xxvi. 2, cxxxix. 23,
   24. Is there not much teaching here for our easy living, and light
   ideas of the sinfulness of sin?]

   [307] The Vatican has: "But rather give thanks to the Lord, that He,
   knowing what is to come to pass, has deemed you worthy to tell you
   beforehand that affiction is coming upon those who are able to bear
   it." [1 Cor. x. 13. But the whole argument turns on Jas. i. 2, as
   Hermas delights in this practical apostle.]

   [308] [Sam. iii. 31, 32, 33.]
     

    Similitude Eighth.

      The Sins of the Elect and of the Penitent are of Many Kinds, But All Will
      Be Rewarded According to the Measure of Their Repentance and Good Works.

      Chap. I.

   He showed me a large willow tree overshadowing plains and mountains,
   and under the shade of this willow had assembled all those who were
   called by the name of the Lord. And a glorious angel of the Lord, who
   was very tall, was standing beside the willow, having a large
   pruning-knife, and he was cutting little twigs from the willow and
   distributing them among the people that were overshadowed by the
   willow; and the twigs which he gave them were small, about a cubit, as
   it were, in length. And after they had all received the twigs, the
   angel laid down the pruning-knife, and that tree was sound, as I had
   seen it at first. And I marvelled within myself, saying, "How is the
   tree sound, after so many branches have been cut off?" And the Shepherd
   said to me, "Do not be surprised if the tree remains sound after so
   many branches were lopped off; [but wait, [309] ] and when you shall
   have seen everything, then it will be explained to you what it means."
   The angel who had distributed the branches among the people again asked
   them from them, and in the order in which they had received them were
   they summoned to him, and each one of them returned his branch. And the
   angel of the Lord took and looked at them. From some he received the
   branches withered and moth-eaten; those who returned branches in that
   state the angel of the Lord ordered to stand apart. Others, again,
   returned them withered, but not moth-eaten; and these he ordered to
   stand apart. And others returned them half-withered, and these stood
   apart; and others returned their branches half-withered and having
   cracks in them, and these stood apart. [And others returned their
   branches green and having cracks in them; and these stood apart. [310]
   ] And others returned their branches, one-half withered and the other
   green; and these stood apart. And others brought their branches
   two-thirds green and the remaining third withered; and these stood
   apart. And others returned them two-thirds withered and one-third
   green; and these stood apart. And others returned their branches nearly
   all green, the smallest part only, the top, being withered, but they
   had cracks in them; and these stood apart. And of others very little
   was green, but the remaining parts withered; and these stood apart. And
   others came bringing their branches green, as they had received them
   from the angel. And the majority of the crowd returned branches of that
   kind, and with these the angel was exceedingly pleased; and these stood
   apart. [And others returned their branches green and having offshoots;
   and these stood apart, and with these the angel was exceedingly
   delighted. [311] ] And others returned their branches green and with
   offshoots, and the offshoots had some fruit, as it were; [312] and
   those men whose branches were found to be of that kind were exceedingly
   joyful. And the angel was exultant because of them; and the Shepherd
   also rejoiced greatly because of them.

      Chap. II.

   And the angel of the Lord ordered crowns to be brought; [313] and there
   were brought crowns, formed, as it were, of palms; and he crowned the
   men who had returned the branches which had offshoots and some fruit,
   and sent them away into the tower. And the others also he sent into the
   tower, those, namely, who had returned branches that were green and had
   offshoots but no fruit, having given them seals. [314] And all who went
   into the tower had the same clothing--white as snow. [315] And those
   who returned their branches green, as they had received them, he set
   free, giving them clothing and seals. Now after the angel had finished
   these things, he said to the Shepherd, "I am going away, and you will
   send these away within the walls, according as each one is worthy to
   have his dwelling. And examine their branches carefully, and so dismiss
   them; but examine them with care. See that no one escape you," he
   added; "and if any escape you, I will try them at the altar." [316]
   Having said these words to the Shepherd, he departed. And after the
   angel had departed, the Shepherd said to me, "Let us take the branches
   of all these and plant them, and see if any of them will live." I said
   to him, "Sir, how can these withered branches live?" He answered, and
   said, "This tree is a willow, and of a kind that is very tenacious of
   life. If, therefore, the branches be planted, and receive a little
   moisture, many of them will live. And now let us try, and pour water
   [317] upon them; and if any of them live I shall rejoice with them, and
   if they do not I at least will not be found neglectful." And the
   Shepherd bade me call them as each one was placed. And they came, rank
   by rank, and gave their branches to the Shepherd. And the Shepherd
   received the branches, and planted them in rows; and after he had
   planted them he poured much water upon them, so that the branches could
   not be seen for the water; and after the branches had drunk it in, he
   said to me, "Let us go, and return after a few days, and inspect all
   the branches; for He who created this tree wishes all those to live who
   received branches [318] from it. And I also hope that the greater part
   of these branches which received moisture and drank of the water will
   live."

      Chap. III.

   I said to him, "Sir, explain to me what this tree means, for I am
   perplexed about it, because, after so many branches have been cut off,
   it continues sound, and nothing appears to have been cut away from it.
   By this, now, I am perplexed." "Listen," he said: "This great tree
   [319] that casts its shadow over plains, and mountains, and all the
   earth, is the law of God that was given to the whole world; and this
   law is the Son of God, [320] proclaimed to the ends of the earth; and
   the people who are under its shadow are they who have heard the
   proclamation, and have believed upon Him. And the great and glorious
   angel Michael is he who has authority over this people, and governs
   them; [321] for this is he who gave them the law [322] into the hearts
   of believers: he accordingly superintends them to whom he gave it, to
   see if they have kept the same. And you see the branches of each one,
   for the branches are the law. You see, accordingly, many branches that
   have been rendered useless, and you will know them all--those who have
   not kept the law; and you will see the dwelling of each one." I said to
   him, "Sir, why did he dismiss some into the tower, and leave others to
   you?" "All," he answered, "who transgressed the law which they received
   from him, he left under my power for repentance; but all who have
   satisfied the law, and kept it, he retains under his own authority."
   "Who, then," I continued, "are they who were crowned, and who go to the
   tower?" "These are they who have suffered on account of the law; but
   the others, and they who returned their branches green, and with
   offshoots, but without fruit, are they who have been afflicted on
   account of the law, but who have not suffered nor denied [323] their
   law; and they who returned their branches green as they had received
   them, are the venerable, and the just, and they who have walked
   carefully in a pure heart, and have kept the commandments of the Lord.
   And the rest you will know when I have examined those branches which
   have been planted and watered."

      Chap. IV.

   And after a few days we came to the place, and the Shepherd sat down in
   the angel's place, and I stood beside him. And he said to me, "Gird
   yourself with pure, undressed linen made of sackcloth;" and seeing me
   girded, and ready to minister to him, "Summon," he said, "the men to
   whom belong the branches that were planted, according to the order in
   which each one gave them in." So I went away to the plain, and summoned
   them all, and they all stood in their ranks. He said to them, "Let each
   one pull out his own branch, and bring it to me." The first to give in
   were those who had them withered and cut; and [324] because they were
   found to be thus withered and cut, he commanded them to stand apart.
   And next they gave them in who had them withered, but not cut. And some
   of them gave in their branches green, and some withered and eaten as by
   a moth. Those that gave them in green, accordingly, he ordered to stand
   apart; and those who gave them in dry and cut, he ordered to stand
   along with the first. Next they gave them in who had them half-withered
   and cracked; [325] and many of them gave them in green and without
   cracks; and some green and with offshoots and fruits upon the
   offshoots, such as they had who went, after being crowned, into the
   tower. And some handed them in withered and eaten, and some withered
   and uneaten; and some as they were, half-withered and cracked. And he
   commanded them each one to stand apart, some towards their own rows,
   and others apart from them.

      Chap. V.

   Then they gave in their branches who had them green, but cracked: all
   these gave them in green, and stood in their own row. And the Shepherd
   was pleased with these, because they were all changed, and had lost
   their cracks. [326] And they also gave them in who had them half-green
   and half-withered: of some, accordingly, the branches were found
   completely green; of others, half-withered; of others, withered and
   eaten; of others, green, and having offshoots. All these were sent
   away, each to his own row. [Next they gave in who had them two parts
   green and one-third withered. Many of them gave them half-withered; and
   others withered and rotten; and others half-withered and cracked, and a
   few green. These all stood in their own row. [327] ] And they gave them
   in who had them green, but to a very slight extent withered and
   cracked. [328] Of these, some gave them in green, and others green and
   with offshoots. And these also went away to their own row. Next they
   gave them who had a very small part green and the other parts withered.
   Of these the branches were found for the most part green and having
   offshoots, and fruit upon the offshoots, and others altogether green.
   With these branches the Shepherd was exceedingly pleased, because they
   were found in this state. And these went away, each to his own row.

      Chap. VI.

   After the Shepherd had examined the branches of them all, he said to
   me, "I told you that this tree was tenacious of life. You see," he
   continued, "how many repented and were saved." "I see, sir," I replied.
   "That you may behold," he added, "the great mercy of the Lord, that it
   is great and glorious, and that He has given His Spirit to those who
   are worthy of repentance." "Why then, sir," I said, "did not all these
   repent?" He answered, "To them whose heart He saw would become pure,
   and obedient to Him, He gave power to repent with the whole heart. But
   to them whose deceit and wickedness He perceived, and saw that they
   intended to repent hypocritically, He did not grant repentance, [329]
   lest they should again profane His name." I said to him, "Sir, show me
   now, with respect to those who gave in the branches, of what sort they
   are, and their abode, in order that they hearing it who believed, and
   received the seal, and broke it, and did not keep it whole, may, on
   coming to a knowledge of their deeds, repent, and receive from you a
   seal, and may glorify the Lord because He had compassion upon them, and
   sent you to renew their spirits." "Listen," he said: "they whose
   branches were found withered and moth-eaten are the apostates and
   traitors of the Church, who have blasphemed the Lord in their sins, and
   have, moreover, been ashamed of the name of the Lord by which they were
   called. [330] These, therefore, at the end were lost unto God. And you
   see that not a single one of them repented, although they heard the
   words which I spake to them, which I enjoined upon you. From such life
   departed. [331] And they who gave them in withered and undecayed, these
   also were near to them; for they were hypocrites, and introducers of
   strange doctrines, and subverters of the servants of God, especially of
   those who had sinned, not allowing them to repent, but persuading them
   by foolish doctrines. [332] These, accordingly, have a hope of
   repentance. And you see that many of them also have repented since I
   spake to them, and they will still repent. But all who will not repent
   have lost their lives; and as many of them as repented became good, and
   their dwelling was appointed within the first walls; and some of them
   ascended even into the tower. You see, then," he said, "that repentance
   involves life to sinners, but non-repentance death."

      Chap. VII.

   "And as many as gave in the branches half-withered and cracked, hear
   also about them. They whose branches were half-withered to the same
   extent are the wavering; for they neither live, nor are they dead. And
   they who have them half-withered and cracked are both waverers and
   slanderers, [railing against the absent,] and never at peace with one
   another, but always at variance. And yet to these also," he continued,
   "repentance is possible. You see," he said, "that some of them have
   repented, and there is still remaining in them," he continued, "a hope
   of repentance. And as many of them," he added, "as have repented, shall
   have their dwelling in the tower. And those of them who have been
   slower in repenting shall dwell within the walls. And as many as do not
   repent at all, but abide in their deeds, shall utterly perish. And they
   who gave in their branches green and cracked were always faithful and
   good, though emulous of each other about the foremost places, and about
   fame: [333] now all these are foolish, in indulging in such a rivalry.
   Yet they also, being naturally good, [334] on hearing my commandments,
   purified themselves, and soon repented. Their dwelling, accordingly,
   was in the tower. But if any one relapse into strife, he will be cast
   out of the tower, and will lose his life. [335] Life is the possession
   of all who keep the commandments of the Lord; but in the commandments
   there is no rivalry in regard to the first places, or glory of any
   kind, but in regard to patience and personal humility. Among such
   persons, then, is the life of the Lord, but amongst the quarrelsome and
   transgressors, death."

      Chap. VIII.

   "And they who gave in their branches half-green and half-withered, are
   those who are immersed in business, and do not cleave to the saints.
   For this reason, the one half of them is living, and the other half
   dead. [336] Many, accordingly, who heard my commands repented, and
   those at least who repented had their dwelling in the tower. But some
   of them at last fell away: these, accordingly, have not repentance, for
   on account of their business they blasphemed the Lord, and denied Him.
   They therefore lost their lives through the wickedness which they
   committed. And many of them doubted. These still have repentance in
   their power, if they repent speedily; and their abode will be in the
   tower. But if they are slower in repenting, they will dwell within the
   walls; and if they do not repent, they too have lost their lives. And
   they who gave in their branches two-thirds withered and one-third
   green, are those who have denied [the Lord] in various ways. Many,
   however, repented, but some of them hesitated and were in doubt. These,
   then, have repentance within their reach, if they repent quickly, and
   do not remain in their pleasures; [337] but if they abide in their
   deeds, these, too, work to themselves death."

      Chap. IX.

   "And they who returned their branches two-thirds withered and one-third
   green, are those that were faithful indeed; but after acquiring wealth,
   and becoming distinguished amongst the heathen, they clothed themselves
   with great pride, and became lofty-minded, and deserted the truth, and
   did not cleave to the righteous, but lived with the heathen, and this
   way of life became more agreeable to them. [338] They did not, however,
   depart from God, but remained in the faith, although not working the
   works of faith. Many of them accordingly repented, and their dwelling
   was in the tower. And others continuing to live until the end with the
   heathen, and being corrupted by their vain glories, [departed from God,
   serving the works and deeds of the heathen. [339] ] These were reckoned
   with the heathen. But others of them hesitated, not hoping to be saved
   on account of the deeds which they had done; while others were in
   doubt, and caused divisions among themselves. To those, therefore, who
   were in doubt on account of their deeds, repentance is still open; but
   their repentance ought to be speedy, that their dwelling may be in the
   tower. And to those who do not repent, but abide in their pleasures,
   death is near."

      Chap. X.

   "And they who give in their branches green, but having the tips
   withered and cracked, these were always good, and faithful, and
   distinguished before God; but they sinned a very little through
   indulging small desires, and finding little faults with one another.
   But on hearing my words the greater part of them quickly repented, and
   their dwelling was upon the tower. Yet some of them were in doubt; and
   certain of them who were in doubt wrought greater dissension. Among
   these, therefore, is hope of repentance, because they were always good;
   and with difficulty will any one of them perish. And they who gave up
   their branches withered, [340] but having a very small part green, are
   those who believed only, yet continue working the works of iniquity.
   They never, however, departed from God, but gladly bore His name, and
   joyfully received His servants into their houses. [341] Having
   accordingly heard of this repentance, they unhesitatingly repented, and
   practice all virtue and righteousness; and some of them even [suffered,
   being willingly put to death [342] ], knowing their deeds which they
   had done. Of all these, therefore, the dwelling shall be in the tower."

      Chap. XI.

   And after he had finished the explanations of all the branches, he said
   to me, "Go and tell them to every one, that they may repent, and they
   shall live unto God. [343] Because the Lord, having had compassion on
   all men, has sent me to give repentance, although some are not worthy
   of it on account of their works; but the Lord, being long-suffering,
   desires those who were called by His Son to be saved." [344] I said to
   him, "Sir, I hope that all who have heard them will repent; for I am
   persuaded that each one, on coming to a knowledge of his own works, and
   fearing the Lord, will repent." He answered me, and said, "All who with
   their whole heart shall purify themselves from their wickedness before
   enumerated, and shall add no more to their sins, will receive healing
   from the Lord for their former transgressions, if they do not hesitate
   at these commandments; and they will live unto God. But do you walk in
   my commandments, and live." Having shown me these things, and spoken
   all these words, he said to me, "And the rest I will show you after a
   few days."
     

   [309] Omitted by Lips.

   [310] Omitted in Lips. and Vat.

   [311] Omitted in Lips.

   [312] Num. xvii. 8. [Willows are chosen, perhaps, with reference to
   Isa. xliv. 4; but Ezekiel's willow supplies the thought here (Ezek.
   xvii. 5, 6).]

   [313] 2 Esdras ii. 43.

   [314] [Eph. i. 13, iv. 30.]

   [315] [Rev. xix. 8.]

   [316] [Rev. viii. 3; Num. xvii. 7.]

   [317] [Ezek. xxxix. 29.]

   [318] [Rom. xi. 16.]

   [319] [Matt. xiii. 32.]

   [320] "And by this law the Son of God was preached to all the ends of
   the earth."--Vat. [Hermas again introduces here the name which he made
   his base in Vision ii. 2.]

   [321] [Dan. x. 21, xii 1; Rev. xii. 7. It is not necessary to accept
   this statement as doctrine, but the idea may be traced to these texts.]

   [322] [That is, the New Law, the gospel of the Son of God.]

   [323] [Vision ii. 2. Denying the Son.]

   [324] And ... cut, omitted in Pal.

   [325] [Wake reads "cleft."]

   [326] [Clefts.]

   [327] Omitted in Lips. Translation is made from Vat.

   [328] The versions vary in some of the minute particulars.

   [329] [The by-gone quarrels about foreknowledge and predestination are
   innocently enough anticipated here.]

   [330] [Jas. ii. 7.]

   [331] [Heb. x. 39.]

   [332] [Here is a note of Hermas' time. Not only does it imply the
   history of heresies as of some progress, but it marks the Montanist
   refusal to receive penitent lapsers.]

   [333] [He has in view the passages Matt. xx. 23, Luke xxii. 24, and
   hence is lenient in judgment.]

   [334] [Why "naturally"? Latin, "de ipsis tamen qui boni fuerunt."
   Greek, agathoi ontes. Gebhardt and Harnack, Lips. 1877.]

   [335] [Jas. iii. 16.]

   [336] [Jas. ii. 26.]

   [337] [1 Tim. v. 6.]

   [338] [A note of the time of composing The Shepherd. This chapter
   speaks of experiences of life among heathen and of wordly Christians,
   inconsistent with the times of Clement.]

   [339] Omitted in Lips.; supplied from Vat.

   [340] "Withered, all but their tops, which alone were green."--Vat. and
   Pal.

   [341] [Matt. x. 40-42 influences this judgment of Hermas.]

   [342] Omitted in Lips., which has, instead, "are afraid."

   [343] [A cheering conclusion of his severe judgments, and aimed at the
   despair created by Montanist prophesyings.]

   [344] Literally, "the calling that was made by His Son to be saved."
   The Vatican renders this, "He wishes to preserve the invitation made by
   His Son." The Pal. has, "wishes to save His Church, which belongs to
   His Son." In the text, klesis is taken as = kletoi.
     

    Similitude Ninth.

      The Great Mysteries in the Building of the Militant and Triumphant Church.

      Chap. I.

   After I had written down the commandments and similitudes of the
   Shepherd, the angel of repentance, he came to me and said, "I wish to
   explain to you what the Holy Spirit [345] that spake with you in the
   form of the Church showed you, for that Spirit is the Son of God. For,
   as you were somewhat weak in the flesh, it was not explained to you by
   the angel. When, however, you were strengthened by the Spirit, and your
   strength was increased, so that you were able to see the angel also,
   then accordingly was the building of the tower shown you by the Church.
   In a noble and solemn manner did you see everything as if shown you by
   a virgin; but now you see [them] through the same Spirit as if shown by
   an angel. You must, however, learn everything from me with greater
   accuracy. For I was sent for this purpose by the glorious angel to
   dwell in your house, that you might see all things with power,
   entertaining no fear, even as it was before." And he led me away into
   Arcadia, to a round hill; [346] and he placed me on the top of the
   hill, and showed me a large plain, and round about the plain twelve
   mountains, all having different forms. The first was black as soot; and
   the second bare, without grass; and the third full of thorns and
   thistles; and the fourth with grass half-withered, the upper parts of
   the plants green, and the parts about the roots withered; and some of
   the grasses, when the sun scorched them, became withered. And the fifth
   mountain had green grass, and was ragged. And the sixth mountain was
   quite full of clefts, some small and others large; and the clefts were
   grassy, but the plants were not very vigorous, but rather, as it were,
   decayed. The seventh mountain, again, had cheerful pastures, and the
   whole mountain was blooming, and every kind of cattle and birds were
   feeding upon that mountain; and the more the cattle and the birds ate,
   the more the grass of that mountain flourished. And the eighth mountain
   was full of fountains, and every kind of the Lord's creatures drank of
   the fountains of that mountain. But the ninth mountain [had no water at
   all, and was wholly a desert, and had within it deadly serpents, which
   destroy men. And the tenth mountain [347] ] had very large trees, and
   was completely shaded, and under the shadow of the trees sheep lay
   resting and ruminating. And the eleventh mountain was very thickly
   wooded, and those trees were productive, being adorned with various
   sorts of fruits, so that any one seeing them would desire to eat of
   their fruits. The twelfth mountain, again, was wholly white, and its
   aspect was cheerful, and the mountain in itself was very beautiful.

      Chap. II.

   And in the middle of the plain he showed me a large white rock that had
   arisen out of the plain. And the rock was more lofty than the
   mountains, rectangular in shape, so as to be capable of containing the
   whole world: and that rock was old, having a gate cut out of it; and
   the cutting out of the gate seemed to me as if recently done. And the
   gate glittered to such a degree under the sunbeams, that I marvelled at
   the splendour of the gate; [348] and round about the gate were standing
   twelve virgins. The four who stood at the corners seemed to me more
   distinguished than the others--they were all, however,
   distinguished--and they were standing at the four parts of the gate;
   two virgins between each part. And they were clothed with linen tunics,
   and gracefully girded, having their right shoulders exposed, as if
   about to bear some burden. Thus they stood ready; for they were
   exceedingly cheerful and eager. After I had seen these things, I
   marvelled in myself, because I was beholding great and glorious sights.
   And again I was perplexed about the virgins, because, although so
   delicate, they were standing courageously, as if about to carry the
   whole heavens. And the Shepherd said to me "Why are you reasoning in
   yourself, and perplexing your mind, and distressing yourself? for the
   things which you cannot understand, do not attempt to comprehend, as if
   you were wise; but ask the Lord, that you may receive understanding and
   know them. You cannot see what is behind you, but you see what is
   before. Whatever, then, you cannot see, let alone, and do not torment
   yourself about it: but what you see, make yourself master of it, and do
   not waste your labour about other things; and I will explain to you
   everything that I show you. Look therefore, on the things that remain."

      Chap. III.

   I saw six men come, tall, and distinguished, and similar in appearance,
   and they summoned a multitude of men. And they who came were also tall
   men, and handsome, and powerful; and the six men commanded them to
   build a tower [349] above the rock. And great was the noise of those
   men who came to build the tower, as they ran hither and thither around
   the gate. And the virgins who stood around the gate told the men to
   hasten to build the tower. Now the virgins had spread out their hands,
   as if about to receive something from the men. And the six men
   commanded stones to ascend out of a certain pit, and to go to the
   building of the tower. And there went up ten shining rectangular
   stones, not hewn in a quarry. And the six men called the virgins, and
   bade them carry all the stones that were intended for the building, and
   to pass through the gate, and give them to the men who were about to
   build the tower. And the virgins put upon one another the ten first
   stones which had ascended from the pit, and carried them together, each
   stone by itself.

      Chap. IV.

   And as they stood together around the gate, those who seemed to be
   strong carried them, and they stooped down under the corners of the
   stone; and the others stooped down under the sides of the stones. And
   in this way they carried all the stones. [350] And they carried them
   through the gate as they were commanded, and gave them to the men for
   the tower; and they took the stones and proceeded with the building.
   Now the tower was built upon the great rock, and above the gate. Those
   ten stones were prepared as the foundation for the building of the
   tower. And the rock and gate were the support of the whole of the
   tower. And after the ten stones other twenty [five] came up out of the
   pit, and these were fitted into the building of the tower, being
   carried by the virgins as before. And after these ascended thirty-five.
   And these in like manner were fitted into the tower. And after these
   other forty stones came up; and all these were cast into the building
   of the tower, [and there were four rows in the foundation of the tower,
   [351] ] and they ceased ascending from the pit. And the builders also
   ceased for a little. And again the six men commanded the multitude of
   the crowd to bear stones from the mountains for the building of the
   tower. They were accordingly brought from all the mountains of various
   colours, and being hewn by the men were given to the virgins; and the
   virgins carried them through the gate, and gave them for the building
   of the tower. And when the stones of various colours were placed in the
   building, they all became white alike, and lost their different
   colours. And certain stones were given by the men for the building, and
   these did not become shining; but as they were placed, such also were
   they found to remain: for they were not given by the virgins, nor
   carried through the gate. These stones, therefore, were not in keeping
   with the others in the building of the tower. And the six men, seeing
   these unsuitable stones in the building, commanded them to be taken
   away, and to be carried away down to their own place whence they had
   been taken; [and being removed one by one, they were laid aside; and]
   they say to the men who brought the stones, "Do not ye bring any stones
   at all for the building, but lay them down beside the tower, that the
   virgins may carry them through the gate, and may give them for the
   building. For unless," they said, "they be carried through the gate by
   the hands of the virgins, they cannot change their colours: do not
   toil, therefore," they said, "to no purpose."

      Chap. V.

   And on that day the building was finished, but the tower was not
   completed; for additional building was again about to be added, and
   there was a cessation in the building. And the six men commanded the
   builders all to withdraw a little distance, and to rest, but enjoined
   the virgins not to withdraw from the tower; and it seemed to me that
   the virgins had been left to guard the tower. Now after all had
   withdrawn, and were resting themselves, I said to the Shepherd, "What
   is the reason that the building of the tower was not finished?" "The
   tower," he answered, "cannot be finished just yet, until the Lord of it
   come and examine the building, in order that, if any of the stones be
   found to be decayed, he may change them: for the tower is built
   according to his pleasure." "I would like to know, sir," I said, "what
   is the meaning of the building of this tower, and what the rock and
   gate, and the mountains, and the virgins mean, and the stones that
   ascended from the pit, and were not hewn, but came as they were to the
   building. Why, in the first place, were ten stones placed in the
   foundation, then twenty-five, then thirty-five, then forty? and I wish
   also to know about the stones that went to the building, and were again
   taken out and returned to their own place? On all these points put my
   mind at rest, sir, and explain them to me." "If you are not found to be
   curious about trifles," he replied, "you shall know everything. For
   after a few days [we shall come hither, and you will see the other
   things that happen to this tower, and will know accurately all the
   similitudes." After a few days [352] ] we came to the place where we
   sat down. And he said to me, "Let us go to the tower; for the master of
   the tower is coming to examine it." And we came to the tower, and there
   was no one at all near it, save the virgins only. And the Shepherd
   asked the virgins if perchance the master of the tower had come; and
   they replied that he was about to come [353] to examine the building.

      Chap. VI.

   And, behold, after a little I see an array of many men coming, and in
   the midst of them one man [354] of so remarkable a size as to overtop
   the tower. And the six men who had worked upon the building were with
   him, and many other honourable men were around him. And the virgins who
   kept the tower ran forward and kissed him, and began to walk near him
   around the tower. And that man examined the building carefully, feeling
   every stone separately; and holding a rod in his hand, he struck every
   stone in the building three times. And when he struck them, some of
   them became black as soot, and some appeared as if covered with scabs,
   and some cracked, and some mutilated, and some neither white nor black,
   and some rough and not in keeping with the other stones, and some
   having [very many] stains: such were the varieties of decayed stones
   that were found in the building. He ordered all these to be taken out
   of the tower, and to be laid down beside it, and other stones to be
   brought and put in their stead. [And the builders asked him from what
   mountain he wished them to be brought and put in their place. [355] ]
   And he did not command them to be brought from the mountains, [but he
   bade them be brought from a certain plain which was near at hand. [356]
   ] And the plain was dug up, and shining rectangular stones were found,
   and some also of a round shape; and all the stones which were in that
   plain were brought, and carried through the gate by the virgins. And
   the rectangular stones were hewn, and put in place of those that were
   taken away; but the rounded stones were not put into the building,
   because they were hard to hew, and appeared to yield slowly to the
   chisel; they were deposited, however, beside the tower, as if intended
   to be hewn and used in the building, for they were exceedingly
   brilliant.

      Chap. VII.

   The glorious man, the lord of the whole tower, having accordingly
   finished these alterations, called to him the Shepherd, and delivered
   to him all the stones that were lying beside the tower, that had been
   rejected from the building, and said to him, "Carefully clean all these
   stones, and put aside such for the building of the tower as may
   harmonize with the others; and those that do not, throw far away from
   the tower." [Having given these orders to the Shepherd, he departed
   from the tower [357] ], with all those with whom he had come. Now the
   virgins were standing around the tower, keeping it. I said again to the
   Shepherd, "Can these stones return to the building of the tower, after
   being rejected?" He answered me, and said, "Do you see these stones?"
   "I see them, sir," I replied. "The greater part of these stones," he
   said, "I will hew, and put into the building, and they will harmonize
   with the others." "How, sir," I said, "can they, after being cut all
   round about, fill up the same space?" He answered, "Those that shall be
   found small will be thrown into the middle of the building, and those
   that are larger will be placed on the outside, and they will hold them
   together." Having spoken these words, he said to me, "Let us go, and
   after two days let us come and clean these stones, and cast them into
   the building; for all things around the tower must be cleaned, lest the
   Master come suddenly [358] and find the places about the tower dirty,
   and be displeased, and these stones be not returned for the building of
   the tower, and I also shall seem to be neglectful towards the Master."
   And after two days we came to the tower, and he said to me, "Let us
   examine all the stones, and ascertain those which may return to the
   building." I said to him, "Sir, let us examine them!"

      Chap. VIII.

   And beginning, we first examined the black stones. And such as they had
   been taken out of the building, were they found to remain; and the
   Shepherd ordered them to be removed out of the tower, and to be placed
   apart. Next he examined those that had scabs; and he took and hewed
   many of these, and commanded the virgins to take them up and cast them
   into the building. And the virgins lifted them up, and put them in the
   middle of the building of the tower. And the rest he ordered to be laid
   down beside the black ones; for these, too, were found to be black. He
   next examined those that had cracks; and he hewed many of these, and
   commanded them to be carried by the virgins to the building: and they
   were placed on the outside, because they were found to be sounder than
   the others; but the rest, on account of the multitude of the cracks,
   could not be hewn, and for this reason, therefore, they were rejected
   from the building of the tower. He next examined the chipped stones,
   and many amongst these were found to be black, and some to have great
   cracks. And these also he commanded to be laid down along with those
   which had been rejected. But the remainder, after being cleaned and
   hewn, he commanded to be placed in the building. And the virgins took
   them up, and fitted them into the middle of the building of the tower,
   for they were somewhat weak. He next examined those that were half
   white and half black, and many of them were found to be black. And he
   commanded these also to be taken away along with those which had been
   rejected. And the rest were all taken away by the virgins; for, being
   white, they were fitted by the virgins themselves into the building.
   And they were placed upon the outside, because they were found to be
   sound, so as to be able to support those which were placed in the
   middle, for no part of them at all was chipped. He next examined those
   that were rough and hard; and a few of them were rejected because they
   could not be hewn, as they were found exceedingly hard. But the rest of
   them were hewn, and carried by the virgins, and fitted into the middle
   of the building of the tower; for they were somewhat weak. He next
   examined those that had stains; and of these a very few were black, and
   were thrown aside with the others; but the greater part were found to
   be bright, and these were fitted by the virgins into the building, but
   on account of their strength were placed on the outside.

      Chap. IX.

   He next came to examine the white and rounded stones, and said to me,
   "What are we to do with these stones?" "How do I know, sir?" I replied.
   "Have you no intentions regarding them?" "Sir," I answered, "I am not
   acquainted with this art, neither am I a stone-cutter, nor can I tell."
   "Do you not see," he said, "that they are exceedingly round? and if I
   wish to make them rectangular, a large portion of them must be cut
   away; for some of them must of necessity be put into the building." "If
   therefore," I said, "they must, why do you torment yourself, and not at
   once choose for the building those which you prefer, and fit them into
   it?" He selected the larger ones among them, and the shining ones, and
   hewed them; and the virgins carried and fitted them into the outside
   parts of the building. And the rest which remained over were carried
   away, and laid down on the plain from which they were brought. They
   were not, however, rejected, "because," he said, "there remains yet a
   little addition to be built to the tower. And the lord of this tower
   wishes all the stones to be fitted into the building, because they are
   exceedingly bright." And twelve women were called, very beautiful in
   form, clothed in black, and with dishevelled hair. And these women
   seemed to me to be fierce. But the Shepherd commanded them to lift the
   stones that were rejected from the building, and to carry them away to
   the mountains from which they had been brought. And they were merry,
   and carried away all the stones, and put them in the place whence they
   had been taken. Now after all the stones were removed, and there was no
   longer a single one lying around the tower, he said, "Let us go round
   the tower and see, lest there be any defect in it." So I went round the
   tower along with him. And the Shepherd, seeing that the tower was
   beautifully built, rejoiced exceedingly; for the tower was built in
   such a way, that, on seeing it, I coveted the building of it, for it
   was constructed as if built of one stone, without a single joining. And
   the stone seemed as if hewn out of the rock; having to me the
   appearance of a monolith.

      Chap. X.

   And as I walked along with him, I was full of joy, beholding so many
   excellent things. And the Shepherd said to me, "Go and bring unslaked
   lime and fine-baked clay, that I may fill up the forms of the stones
   that were taken and thrown into the building; for everything about the
   tower must be smooth." And I did as he commanded me, and brought it to
   him. "Assist me," he said, "and the work will soon be finished." He
   accordingly filled up the forms of the stones that were returned to the
   building, and commanded the places around the tower to be swept and to
   be cleaned; and the virgins took brooms and swept the place, and
   carried all the dirt out of the tower, and brought water, and the
   ground around the tower became cheerful and very beautiful. Says the
   Shepherd to me, "Everything has been cleared away; if the lord of the
   tower come to inspect it, he can have no fault to find with us." Having
   spoken these words, he wished to depart; but I laid hold of him by the
   wallet, and began to adjure him by the Lord that he would explain what
   he had showed me. He said to me, "I must rest a little, and then I
   shall explain to you everything; wait for me here until I return." I
   said to him, "Sir, what can I do here alone?" "You are not alone," he
   said, "for these virgins are with you." "Give me in charge to them,
   then," I replied. The Shepherd called them to him, and said to them, "I
   entrust him to you until I come," and went away. And I was alone with
   the virgins; and they were rather merry, but were friendly to me,
   especially the four more distinguished of them.

      Chap. XI.

   The virgins said to me, "The Shepherd does not come here to-day."
   "What, then," said I, "am I to do?" They replied, "Wait for him until
   he comes; and if he comes he will converse with you, and if he does not
   come you will remain here with us until he does come." I said to them,
   "I will wait for him until it is late; and if he does not arrive, I
   will go away into the house, and come back early in the morning." And
   they answered and said to me, "You were entrusted to us; you cannot go
   away from us." "Where, then," I said, "am I to remain?" "You will sleep
   with us," they replied, "as a brother, and not as a husband: for you
   are our brother, and for the time to come we intend to abide with you,
   for we love you exceedingly!" But I was ashamed to remain with them.
   And she who seemed to be the first among them began to kiss me. [And
   the others seeing her kissing me, began also to kiss me], and to lead
   me round the tower, and to play with me. [359] And I, too, became like
   a young man, and began to play with them: for some of them formed a
   chorus, and others danced, and others sang; and I, keeping silence,
   walked with them around the tower, and was merry with them. And when it
   grew late I wished to go into the house; and they would not let me, but
   detained me. So I remained with them during the night, and slept beside
   the tower. Now the virgins spread their linen tunics on the ground, and
   made me lie down in the midst of them; and they did nothing at all but
   pray; and I without ceasing prayed with them, and not less than they.
   And the virgins rejoiced because I thus prayed. And I remained there
   with the virgins until the next day at the second hour. Then the
   Shepherd returned, and said to the virgins, "Did you offer him any
   insult?" "Ask him," they said. I said to him, "Sir, I was delighted
   that I remained with them." "On what," he asked, "did you sup?" "I
   supped, sir," I replied, "on the words of the Lord the whole night."
   "Did they receive you well?" he inquired. "Yes, sir," I answered.
   "Now," he said, "what do you wish to hear first?" "I wish to hear in
   the order," I said, "in which you showed me from the beginning. I beg
   of you, sir, that as I shall ask you, so also you will give me the
   explanation." "As you wish," he replied, "so also will I explain to
   you, and will conceal nothing at all from you."

      Chap. XII.

   "First of all, sir," I said, "explain this to me: What is the meaning
   of the rock and the gate?" "This rock," he answered, "and this gate are
   the Son of God." "How, sir?" I said; "the rock is old, and the gate is
   new." "Listen," he said, "and understand, O ignorant man. The Son of
   God is older than all His creatures, so that He was a fellow-councillor
   with the Father in His work of creation: [360] for this reason is He
   old." "And why is the gate new, sir?" I said. "Because," he answered,
   "He became manifest [361] in the last days of the dispensation: for
   this reason the gate was made new, that they who are to be saved by it
   might enter into the kingdom of God. You saw," he said, "that those
   stones which came in through the gate were used for the building of the
   tower, and that those which did not come, were again thrown back to
   their own place?" "I saw, sir," I replied. "In like manner," he
   continued, "no one shall enter into the kingdom of God unless he
   receive His holy name. For if you desire to enter into a city, and that
   city is surrounded by a wall, and has but one gate, can you enter into
   that city save through the gate which it has?" "Why, how can it be
   otherwise, sir?" I said. "If, then, you cannot enter into the city
   except through its gate, so, in like manner, a man cannot otherwise
   enter into the kingdom of God than by the name of His beloved Son. You
   saw," he added, "the multitude who were building the tower?" "I saw
   them, sir," I said. "Those," he said, "are all glorious angels, and by
   them accordingly is the Lord surrounded. And the gate is the Son of
   God. This is the one entrance to the Lord. In no other way, then, shall
   any one enter in to Him except through His Son. You saw," he continued,
   "the six men, and the tall and glorious man in the midst of them, who
   walked round the tower, and rejected the stones from the building?" "I
   saw him, sir," I answered. "The glorious man," he said, "is the Son of
   God, and those six glorious angels are those who support Him on the
   right hand and on the left. None of these glorious angels," he
   continued, "will enter in unto God apart from Him. Whosoever does not
   receive His [362] name, shall not enter into the kingdom of God."

      Chap. XIII.

   "And the tower," I asked, "what does it mean?" "This tower," he
   replied, "is the Church." "And these virgins, who are they?" "They are
   holy spirits, and men cannot otherwise be found in the kingdom of God
   unless these have put their clothing upon them: for if you receive the
   name only, and do not receive from them the clothing, they are of no
   advantage to you. For these virgins are the powers of the Son of God.
   If you bear His name but possess not His power, it will be in vain that
   you bear His name. Those stones," he continued, "which you saw rejected
   bore His name, but did not put on the clothing of the virgins." "Of
   what nature is their clothing, sir?" I asked. "Their very names," he
   said, "are their clothing. Every one who bears the name of the Son of
   God, ought to bear the names also of these; for the Son Himself bears
   the names [363] of these virgins. As many stones," he continued, "as
   you saw [come into the building of the tower through the hands [364] ]
   of these virgins, and remaining, have been clothed with their strength.
   For this reason you see that the tower became of one stone with the
   rock. So also they who have believed on the Lord [365] through His Son,
   and are clothed with these spirits, shall become one spirit, one body,
   and the colour of their garments shall be one. And the dwelling of such
   as bear the names of the virgins is in the tower." "Those stones, sir,
   that were rejected," I inquired, "on what account were they rejected?
   for they passed through the gate, and were placed by the hands of the
   virgins in the building of the tower." "Since you take an interest in
   everything," he replied, "and examine minutely, hear about the stones
   that were rejected. These all," he said, "received the name of God, and
   they received also the strength of these virgins. Having received,
   then, these spirits, they were made strong, and were with the servants
   of God; and theirs was one spirit, and one body, and one clothing. For
   they were of the same mind, and wrought righteousness. After a certain
   time, however, they were persuaded by the women whom you saw clothed in
   black, and having their shoulders exposed and their hair dishevelled,
   and beautiful in appearance. Having seen these women, they desired to
   have them, and clothed themselves with their strength, and put off the
   strength of the virgins. These, accordingly, were rejected from the
   house of God, and were given over to these women. But they who were not
   deceived by the beauty of these women remained in the house of God. You
   have," he said, "the explanation of those who were rejected."

      Chap. XIV.

   "What, then, sir," I said, "if these men, being such as they are,
   repent and put away their desires after these women, and return again
   to the virgins, and walk in their strength and in their works, shall
   they not enter into the house of God?" "They shall enter in," he said,
   "if they put away the works of these women, and put on again the
   strength of the virgins, and walk in their works. For on this account
   was there a cessation in the building, in order that, if these repent,
   they may depart into the building of the tower. But if they do not
   repent, then others will come in their place, and these at the end will
   be cast out. For all these things I gave thanks to the Lord, because He
   had pity on all that call upon His name; and sent the angel of
   repentance to us who sinned against Him, and renewed our spirit; and
   when we were already destroyed, and had no hope of life, He restored us
   to newness of life." "Now, sir," I continued, "show me why the tower
   was not built upon the ground, but upon the rock and upon the gate."
   "Are you still," he said, "without sense and understanding?" "I must,
   sir," I said, "ask you of all things, because I am wholly unable to
   understand them; for all these things are great and glorious, and
   difficult for man to understand." "Listen," he said: "the name of the
   Son of God is great, and cannot be contained, and supports the whole
   world. [366] If, then, the whole creation is supported by the Son of
   God, what think ye of those who are called by Him, and bear the name of
   the Son of God, and walk in His commandments? do you see what kind of
   persons He supports? Those who bear His name with their whole heart. He
   Himself, accordingly, became a foundation [367] to them, and supports
   them with joy, because they are not ashamed to bear His name."

      Chap. XV. [368]

   "Explain to me, sir," I said, "the names of these virgins, and of those
   women who were clothed in black raiment." "Hear," he said, "the names
   of the stronger virgins who stood at the corners. The first is Faith,
   [369] the second Continence, the third Power, the fourth Patience. And
   the others standing in the midst of these have the following names:
   Simplicity, Innocence, Purity, Cheerfulness, Truth, Understanding,
   Harmony, Love. He who bears these names and that of the Son of God will
   be able to enter into the kingdom of God. Hear, also," he continued,
   "the names of the women who had the black garments; and of these four
   are stronger than the rest. The first is Unbelief, the second:
   Incontinence, the third Disobedience, the fourth Deceit. And their
   followers are called Sorrow, Wickedness, Wantonness, Anger, Falsehood,
   Folly, Backbiting, Hatred. The servant of God who bears these names
   shall see, indeed, the kingdom of God, but shall not enter into it."
   "And the stones, sir," I said, "which were taken out of the pit and
   fitted into the building: what are they?" "The first," he said, "the
   ten, viz., that were placed as a foundation, are the first generation,
   and the twenty-five the second generation, of righteous men; and the
   thirty-five are the prophets of God and His ministers; and the forty
   are the apostles and teachers of the preaching of the Son of God."
   [370] "Why, then, sir," I asked, "did the virgins carry these stones
   also through the gate, and give them for the building of the tower?"
   "Because," he answered, "these were the first who bore these spirits,
   and they never departed from each other, neither the spirits from the
   men nor the men from the spirits, but the spirits remained with them
   until their falling asleep. And unless they had had these spirits with
   them, they would not have been of use for the building of this tower."

      Chap. XVI.

   "Explain to me a little further, sir," I said. "What is it that you
   desire?" he asked. "Why, sir," I said, "did these stones ascend out of
   the pit, and be applied to the building of the tower, after having
   borne these spirits?" "They were obliged," he answered, "to ascend
   through water in order that they might be made alive; for, unless they
   laid aside the deadness of their life, they could not in any other way
   enter into the kingdom of God. Accordingly, those also who fell asleep
   received the seal of the Son of God. For," he continued, "before a man
   bears the name of the Son of God [371] he is dead; but when he receives
   the seal he lays aside his deadness, and obtains life. The seal, then,
   is the water: they descend into the water dead, and they arise alive.
   And to them, accordingly, was this seal preached, and they made use of
   it that they might enter into the kingdom of God." "Why, sir," I asked,
   "did the forty stones also ascend with them out of the pit, having
   already received the seal?" "Because," he said, "these apostles and
   teachers who preached the name of the Son of God, after falling asleep
   in the power and faith of the Son of God, preached it not only to those
   who were asleep, but themselves also gave them the seal of the
   preaching. Accordingly they descended with them into the water, and
   again ascended. [But these descended alive and rose up again alive;
   whereas they who had previously fallen asleep descended dead, but rose
   up again alive. [372] ] By these, then, were they quickened and made to
   know the name of the Son of God. For this reason also did they ascend
   with them, and were fitted along with them into the building of the
   tower, and, untouched by the chisel, were built in along with them. For
   they slept in righteousness and in great purity, but only they had not
   this seal. You have accordingly the explanation of these also."

      Chap. XVII.

   "I understand, sir," I replied. "Now, sir," I continued, "explain to
   me, with respect to the mountains, why their forms are various and
   diverse." "Listen," he said: "these mountains are the twelve tribes,
   which inhabit the whole world. [373] The Son of God, accordingly, was
   preached unto them by the apostles." "But why are the mountains of
   various kinds, some having one form, and others another? Explain that
   to me, sir." "Listen," he answered: "these twelve tribes that inhabit
   the whole world are twelve nations. And they vary in prudence and
   understanding. As numerous, then, as are the varieties of the mountains
   which you saw, are also the diversities of mind and understanding among
   these nations. And I will explain to you the actions of each one."
   "First, sir," I said, "explain this: why, when the mountains are so
   diverse, their stones, when placed in the building, became one colour,
   shining like those also that had ascended out of the pit." "Because,"
   he said, "all the nations that dwell under heaven were called by
   hearing and believing upon the name of the Son of God. [374] Having,
   therefore, received the seal, they had one understanding and one mind;
   and their faith became one, and their love one, and with the name they
   bore also the spirits of the virgins. [375] On this account the
   building of the tower became of one colour, bright as the sun. But
   after they had entered into the same place, and became one body,
   certain of these defiled themselves, and were expelled from the race of
   the righteous, and became again what they were before, or rather
   worse."

      Chap. XVIII.

   "How, sir," I said, "did they become worse, after having known God?"
   [376] "He that does not know God," he answered, "and practices evil,
   receives a certain chastisement for his wickedness; but he that has
   known God, ought not any longer to do evil, but to do good. If,
   accordingly, when he ought to do good, he do evil, does not he appear
   to do greater evil than he who does not know God? For this reason, they
   who have not known God and do evil are condemned to death; but they who
   have known God, and have seen His mighty works, and still continue in
   evil, shall be chastised doubly, and shall die for ever. [377] In this
   way, then, will the Church of God be purified. For as you saw the
   stones rejected from the tower, and delivered to the evil spirits, and
   cast out thence, so [they also shall be cast out, and [378] ] there
   shall be one body of the purified; as the tower also became, as it
   were, of one stone after its purification. In like manner also shall it
   be with the Church of God, after it has been purified, and has rejected
   the wicked, and the hypocrites, and the blasphemers, and the waverers,
   and those who commit wickedness of different kinds. After these have
   been cast away, the Church of God shall be one body, of one mind, of
   one understanding, of one faith, of one love. And then the Son of God
   will be exceeding glad, and shall rejoice over them, because He has
   received His people pure." [379] "All these things, sir," I said, "are
   great and glorious."

   "Moreover, sir," I said, "explain to me the power and the actions of
   each one of the mountains, that every soul, trusting in the Lord, and
   hearing it, may glorify His great, and marvellous, and glorious name."
   "Hear," he said, "the diversity of the mountains and of the twelve
   nations."

      Chap. XIX.

   "From the first mountain, which was black, they that believed are the
   following: apostates and blasphemers against the Lord, and betrayers of
   the servants of God. To these repentance is not open; but death lies
   before them, and on this account also are they black, for their race is
   a lawless one. And from the second mountain, which was bare, they who
   believed are the following: hypocrites, and teachers of wickedness. And
   these, accordingly, are like the former, not having any fruits of
   righteousness; for as their mountain was destitute of fruit, so also
   such men have a name indeed, but are empty of faith, and there is no
   fruit of truth in them. They indeed have repentance in their power, if
   they repent quickly; but if they are slow in so doing, they shall die
   along with the former." "Why, sir," I said, "have these repentance, but
   the former not? for their actions are nearly the same." "On this
   account," he said, "have these repentance, because they did not
   blaspheme their Lord, nor become betrayers of the servants of God; but
   on account of their desire of possessions they became hypocritical, and
   each one taught according to the desires of men that were sinners. But
   they will suffer a certain punishment; and repentance is before them,
   because they were not blasphemers or traitors."

      Chap. XX.

   "And from the third mountain, which had thorns and thistles, they who
   believed are the following. There are some of them rich, and others
   immersed in much business. The thistles are the rich, and the thorns
   are they who are immersed in much business. Those, [accordingly, who
   are entangled in many various kinds of business, do not [380] ] cleave
   to the servants of God, but wander away, being choked by their business
   transactions; and the rich cleave with difficulty to the servants of
   God, fearing lest these should ask something of them. Such persons,
   accordingly, shall have difficulty in entering the kingdom of God. For
   as it is disagreeable to walk among thistles with naked feet, so also
   it is hard for such to enter the kingdom of God. [381] But to all these
   repentance, and that speedy, is open, in order that what they did not
   do in former times they may make up for in these days, and do some
   good, and they shall live unto God. But if they abide in their deeds,
   they shall be delivered to those women, who will put them to death."

      Chap. XXI.

   "And from the fourth mountain, which had much grass, the upper parts of
   the plants green, and the parts about the roots withered, and some also
   scorched by the sun, they who believed are the following: the doubtful,
   and they who have the Lord upon their lips, but have Him not in their
   heart. On this account their foundations are withered, and have no
   strength; and their words alone live, while their works are dead. Such
   persons are [neither alive nor [382] ] dead. They resemble, therefore,
   the waverers: for the wavering are neither withered nor green, being
   neither living nor dead. For as their blades, on seeing the sun, were
   withered, so also the wavering, when they hear of affliction, on
   account of their fear, worship idols, and are ashamed of the name of
   their Lord. [383] Such, then, are neither alive nor dead. But these
   also may yet live, if they repent quickly; and if they do not repent,
   they are already delivered to the women, who take away their life."

      Chap. XXII.

   "And from the fifth mountain, which had green grass, and was rugged,
   they who believed are the following: believers, indeed, but slow to
   learn, and obstinate, and pleasing themselves, wishing to know
   everything, and knowing nothing at all. On account of this obstinacy of
   theirs, understanding departed from them, and foolish senselessness
   entered into them. And they praise themselves as having wisdom, and
   desire to become teachers, although destitute of sense. On account,
   therefore, of this loftiness of mind, many became vain, exalting
   themselves: for self-will and empty confidence is a great demon. Of
   these, accordingly, many were rejected, but some repented and believed,
   and subjected themselves to those that had understanding, knowing their
   own foolishness. And to the rest of this class repentance is open; for
   they were not wicked, but rather foolish, and without understanding. If
   these therefore repent, they will live unto God; but if they do not
   repent, they shall have their dwelling with the women who wrought
   wickedness among them."

      Chap. XXIII.

   "And those from the sixth mountain, which had clefts large and small,
   and decayed grass in the clefts, who believed, were the following: they
   who occupy the small clefts are those who bring charges against one
   another, and by reason of their slanders have decayed in the faith.
   Many of them, however, repented; and the rest also will repent when
   they hear my commandments, for their slanders are small, and they will
   quickly repent. But they who occupy the large clefts are persistent in
   their slanders, and vindictive in their anger against each other.
   These, therefore, were thrown away from the tower, and rejected from
   having a part in its building. Such persons, accordingly, shall have
   difficulty in living. If our God and Lord, who rules over all things,
   and has power over all His creation, does not remember evil against
   those who confess their sins, but is merciful, does man, who is
   corruptible and full of sins, remember evil against a fellow-man, as if
   he were able to destroy or to save him? [384] I, the angel of
   repentance, say unto you, As many of you as are of this way of
   thinking, lay it aside, and repent, and the Lord will heal your former
   sins, if you purify yourselves from this demon; but if not, you will be
   delivered over to him for death."

      Chap. XXIV.

   "And those who believed from the seventh mountain, on which the grass
   was green and flourishing, and the whole of the mountain fertile, and
   every kind of cattle and the fowls of heaven were feeding on the grass
   on this mountain, and the grass on which they pastured became more
   abundant, were the following: they were always simple, and harmless,
   and blessed, bringing no charges against one another, but always
   rejoicing greatly because of the servants of God, and being clothed
   with the holy spirit of these virgins, and always having pity on every
   man, and giving aid from their own labour to every man, without
   reproach and without hesitation. [385] The Lord, therefore, seeing
   their simplicity and all their meekness, multiplied them amid the
   labours of their hands, and gave them grace in all their doings. And I,
   the angel of repentance, say to you who are such, Continue to be such
   as these, and your seed will never be blotted out; for the Lord has
   made trial of you, and inscribed you in the number of us, and the whole
   of your seed will dwell with the Son of God; for ye have received of
   His Spirit."

      Chap. XXV.

   "And they who believed from the eighth mountain, where were the many
   fountains, and where all the creatures of God drank of the fountains,
   were the following: apostles, and teachers, who preached to the whole
   world, and who taught solemnly and purely the word of the Lord, and did
   not at all fall into evil desires, but walked always in righteousness
   and truth, according as they had received the Holy Spirit. Such
   persons, therefore, shall enter in with the angels." [386]

      Chap. XXVI.

   "And they who believed from the ninth mountain, which was deserted, and
   had in it creeping things and wild beasts which destroy men, were the
   following: they who had the stains as servants, [387] who discharged
   their duty ill, and who plundered widows and orphans of their
   livelihood, and gained possessions for themselves from the ministry,
   which they had received. [388] If, therefore, they remain under the
   dominion of the same desire, they are dead, and there is no hope of
   life for them; but if they repent, and finish their ministry in a holy
   manner, they shall be able to live. And they who were covered with
   scabs are those who have denied their Lord, and have not returned to
   Him again; but becoming withered and desert-like, and not cleaving to
   the servants of God, but living in solitude, they destroy their own
   souls. For as a vine, when left within an enclosure, and meeting with
   neglect, is destroyed, and is made desolate by the weeds, and in time
   grows wild, and is no longer of any use to its master, so also are such
   men as have given themselves up, and become useless to their Lord, from
   having contracted savage habits. These men, therefore, have repentance
   in their power, unless they are found to have denied from the heart;
   but if any one is found to have denied from the heart, I do not know if
   he may live. And I say this not for these present days, in order that
   any one who has denied may obtain repentance, for it is impossible for
   him to be saved who now intends to deny his Lord; but to those who
   denied Him long ago, repentance seems to be possible. If, therefore,
   any one intends to repent, let him do so quickly, before the tower is
   completed; for if not, he will be utterly destroyed by the women. And
   the chipped stones are the deceitful and the slanderers; and the wild
   beasts which you saw on the ninth mountain, are the same. For as wild
   beasts destroy and kill a man by their poison, so also do the words of
   such men destroy and ruin a man. These, accordingly, are mutilated in
   their faith, on account of the deeds which they have done in
   themselves; yet some repented, and were saved. And the rest, who are of
   such a character, can be saved if they repent; but if they do not
   repent, they will perish with those women, whose strength they have
   assumed."

      Chap. XXVII.

   "And from the tenth mountain, where were trees which overshadowed
   certain sheep, they who believed were the following: bishops [389]
   given to hospitality, who always gladly received into their houses the
   servants of God, without dissimulation. And the bishops never failed to
   protect, by their service, the widows, and those who were in want, and
   always maintained a holy conversation. All these, accordingly, shall be
   protected by the Lord for ever. They who do these things are honourable
   before God, and their place is already with the angels, if they remain
   to the end serving God."

      Chap. XXVIII.

   "And from the eleventh mountain, where were trees full of fruits,
   adorned with fruits of various kinds, they who believed were the
   following: they who suffered for the name of the Son of God, and who
   also suffered cheerfully with their whole heart, and laid down their
   lives." "Why, then, sir," I said, "do all these trees bear fruit, and
   some of them fairer than the rest?" "Listen," he said: "all who once
   suffered for the name of the Lord are honourable before God; and of all
   these the sins were remitted, because they suffered for the name of the
   Son of God. [390] And why their fruits are of various kinds, and some
   of them superior, listen. All," he continued, "who were brought before
   the authorities and were examined, and did not deny, but suffered
   cheerfully--these are held in greater honour with God, and of these the
   fruit is superior; but all who were cowards, and in doubt, and who
   reasoned in their hearts whether they would deny or confess, and yet
   suffered, of these the fruit is less, because that suggestion came into
   their hearts; for that suggestion--that a servant should deny his
   Lord--is evil. Have a care, therefore, ye who are planning such things,
   lest that suggestion remain in your hearts, and ye perish unto God. And
   ye who suffer for His name ought to glorify God, because He deemed you
   worthy to bear His name, that all your sins might be healed.
   [Therefore, rather deem yourselves happy], and think that ye have done
   a great thing, if any of you suffer on account of God. The Lord bestows
   upon you life, and ye do not understand, for your sins were heavy; but
   if you had not suffered for the name of the Lord, ye would have died to
   God on account of your sins. These things I say to you who are
   hesitating about denying or confessing: acknowledge that ye have the
   Lord, lest, denying Him, ye be delivered up to prison. If the heathen
   chastise their slaves, when one of them denies his master, what, think
   ye, will your Lord do, who has authority over all men? Put away these
   counsels out of your hearts, that you may live continually unto God."

      Chap. XXIX.

   "And they who believed from the twelfth mountain, which was white, are
   the following: they are as infant children, in whose hearts no evil
   originates; nor did they know what wickedness is, but always remained
   as children. Such accordingly, without doubt, dwell in the kingdom of
   God, because they defiled in nothing the commandments of God; but they
   remained like children all the days of their life in the same mind. All
   of you, then, who shall remain stedfast, and be as children, [391]
   without doing evil, will be more honoured than all who have been
   previously mentioned; for all infants are honourable before God, and
   are the first persons with Him. [392] Blessed, then, are ye who put
   away wickedness from yourselves, and put on innocence. As the first of
   all will you live unto God."

   After he had finished the similitudes of the mountains, I said to him,
   "Sir, explain to me now about the stones that were taken out of the
   plain, and put into the building instead of the stones that were taken
   out of the tower; and about the round stones that were put into the
   building; and those that still remain round."

      Chap. XXX.

   "Hear," he answered, "about all these also. The stones taken out of the
   plain and put into the building of the tower instead of those that were
   rejected, are the roots of this white mountain. When, therefore, they
   who believed from the white mountain were all found guileless, the Lord
   of the tower commanded those from the roots of this mountain to be cast
   into the building of the tower; for he knew that if these stones were
   to go to the building of the tower, they would remain bright, and not
   one of them become black. [393] But if he had so resolved with respect
   to the other mountains, it would have been necessary for him to visit
   that tower again, and to cleanse it. Now all these persons were found
   white who believed, and who will yet believe, for they are of the same
   race. This is a happy race, because it is innocent. Hear now, further,
   about these round and shining stones. All these also are from the white
   mountain. Hear, moreover, why they were found round: because their
   riches had obscured and darkened them a little from the truth, although
   they never departed from God; nor did any evil word proceed out of
   their mouth, but all justice, virtue, and truth. When the Lord,
   therefore, saw the mind of these persons, that they were born good,
   [394] and could be good, He ordered their riches to be cut down, not to
   be taken [395] away for ever, that they might be able to do some good
   with what was left them; and they will live unto God, because they are
   of a good race. Therefore were they rounded a little by the chisel, and
   put in the building of the tower.

      Chap. XXXI.

   "But the other round stones, which had not yet been adapted to the
   building of the tower, and had not yet received the seal, were for this
   reason put back into their place, because they are exceedingly round.
   Now this age must be cut down in these things, and in the vanities of
   their riches, and then they will meet in the kingdom of God; for they
   must of necessity enter into the kingdom of God, because the Lord has
   blessed this innocent race. Of this race, therefore, no one will
   perish; for although any of them be tempted by the most wicked devil,
   and commit sin, he will quickly return to his Lord. I deem you happy,
   I, who am the messenger of repentance, whoever of you are innocent as
   children, [396] because your part is good, and honourable before God.
   Moreover, I say to you all, who have received the seal of the Son of
   God, be clothed with simplicity, and be not mindful of offences, nor
   remain in wickedness. Lay aside, therefore, the recollection of your
   offences and bitternesses, and you will be formed in one spirit. And
   heal and take away from you those wicked schisms, that if the Lord of
   the flocks come, He may rejoice concerning you. And He will rejoice, if
   He find all things sound, and none of you shall perish. But if He find
   any one of these sheep strayed, woe to the shepherds! And if the
   shepherds themselves have strayed, what answer will they give Him for
   their flocks? [397] Will they perchance say that they were harassed by
   their flocks? They will not be believed, for the thing is incredible
   that a shepherd could suffer from his flock; rather will he be punished
   on account of his falsehood. And I myself am a shepherd, and I am under
   a most stringent necessity of rendering an account of you.

      Chap. XXXII.

   "Heal yourselves, therefore, while the tower is still building. The
   Lord dwells in men that love peace, because He loved peace; but from
   the contentious and the utterly wicked He is far distant. Restore to
   Him, therefore, a spirit sound as ye received it. For when you have
   given to a fuller a new garment, and desire to receive it back entire
   at the end, if, then, the fuller return you a torn garment, will you
   take it from him, and not rather be angry, and abuse him, saying, I
   gave you a garment that was entire: why have you rent it, and made it
   useless, so that it can be of no use on account of the rent which you
   have made in it?' Would you not say all this to the fuller about the
   rent which you found in your garment? If, therefore, you grieve about
   your garment, and complain because you have not received it entire,
   what do you think the Lord will do to you, who gave you a sound spirit,
   which you have rendered altogether useless, so that it can be of no
   service to its possessor? for its use began to be unprofitable, seeing
   it was corrupted by you. Will not the Lord, therefore, because of this
   conduct of yours regarding His Spirit, act in the same way, and deliver
   you over to death? Assuredly, I say, he will do the same to all those
   whom He shall find retaining a recollection of offences. [398] Do not
   trample His mercy under foot, He says, but rather honour Him, because
   He is so patient with your sins, and is not as ye are. Repent, for it
   is useful to you."

      Chap. XXXIII.

   "All these things which are written above, I, the Shepherd, the
   messenger of repentance, have showed and spoken to the servants of God.
   [399] If therefore ye believe, and listen to my words, and walk in
   them, and amend your ways, you shall have it in your power to live: but
   if you remain in wickedness, and in the recollection of offences, no
   sinner of that class will live unto God. All these words which I had to
   say have been spoken unto you."

   The Shepherd said to me, "Have you asked me everything?" And I replied,
   "Yes, sir." "Why did you not ask me about the shape of the stones that
   were put into the building, that I might explain to you why we filled
   up the shapes?" And I said, "I forgot, sir." "Hear now, then," he said,
   "about this also. These are they who have now heard my commandments,
   and repented with their whole hearts. And when the Lord saw that their
   repentance was good and pure, and that they were able to remain in it,
   He ordered their former sins to be blotted out. [400] For these shapes
   were their sins, and they were levelled down, that they might not
   appear."
     

   [345] The Spirit.--Vat. [He is called "the Spirit of Christ" by St.
   Peter (i. 11); and perhaps this is a key to the non-dogmatic language
   of Hermas, if indeed he is here speaking of the Holy Spirit personally,
   and not of the Son exclusively. See Simil. v. 6, Isa. v. 1.]

   [346] To a fruitful hill.--Pal. Omitted in Vat. [Hermas delights in the
   picturesque, and introduces Arcadia in harmony with his pastoral
   fiction.]

   [347] Omitted in Lips.

   [348] [As of Eden. Gen. iii. 24; Rev. xxi. 11. The Tsohar.]

   [349] [Vision iii. 1, 2.]

   [350] All carried the gate.--Pal.

   [351] Omitted in Lips.

   [352] Omitted in Lips.

   [353] And they replied that he would forthwith come.--Vat.

   [354] 2 Esdras ii. 43.

   [355] Omitted in Lips. The text is from Vat.; slight variations in Pal.
   And Æth.

   [356] Also omitted from Lips. The text is in all the translations.

   [357] Omitted in Lips. The text is in all the translations.

   [358] [Mark xiii. 36; Matt. xxiv. 46-51.]

   [359] [This curious chapter, be it remembered, is but a dream and a
   similitude. In the pure homes of Christians, it is almost
   unintelligible. Amid the abominations of heathenism, it taught a lesson
   which afterwards required enforcement by the canons and stern
   discipline of the whole Chuirch. The lesson is, that what "begins in
   the spirit" may "end in the flesh." Those who shunning the horrible
   inpurities of the pagans abused spiritual relationships as "brothers
   and sisters," were on the verge of a precipice. "To the pure, all
   things are pure;" but they who presume on this great truth to indulge
   in kissings and like familiarities are tempting a dangerous downfall.
   In this vision, Hermas resorted to "watching and praying;" and the
   virgins rejoiced because he thus saved himself. The behaviour of the
   maidens was what heathen women constantly practiced, and what Christian
   women, bred in such habits of life, did, perhaps, without evil thought,
   relying on their "sun-clad power of chastity." Nothing in this picture
   is the product of Christianity, except the self-mastery inculcated as
   the only safeguard even amongst good women. But see "Elucidation," at
   end of this book.]

   [360] [Hermas confirms the doctrine of St. John (i. 3); also Col. i.
   15, 16. Of this Athanasius would approve.]

   [361] [1 Pet. i. 20.]

   [362] His. God's.--Lips.

   [363] [Ex. xxviii. 12, 29.]

   [364] Omitted in Lips. The text in Vat. and Pal. The Æth different in
   form, but in meaning the same.

   [365] Lord. God.--Vat.

   [366] [Heb. i. 3. Hermas drips with Scripture like a honeycomb.]

   [367] [Isa. xxviii. 16; 1 Cor. iii. 11.]

   [368] This portion of the Leipzig Codex is much eaten away, and
   therefore the text is derived to a considerable extent from the
   translations.

   [369] [The tenacity with which Hermas everywhere exalts the primary
   importance of Faith, makes it inexcusable that he should be charged
   with mere legalizing morality.]

   [370] [Eph. ii. 20; Rev xxi. 14.]

   [371] The name of the Son of God. The name of God.--Lips. [1 John v.
   11, 12.]

   [372] All the translations and Clemens Alexandrinus (Strom., vi. 6, 46)
   have this passage. It is omitted in Lips.

   [373] [Rev. vii. 4.]

   [374] Name of the Son of God. Name of God.--Lips. [Rom. x. 17.]

   [375] [Rev. xiv. 4.]

   [376] God in Pal.; Lord in Vat. and Æth.; Christ in Lips.

   [377] [Luke xii. 47, 48.]

   [378] Omitted in Vat., Æth., Lips.

   [379] [Eph. v. 27.]

   [380] Omitted in Lips. The text from Vat. Substantially the same in the
   other two. [Matt. xiii. 5.]

   [381] Matt. xix. 23, 24. [Mark x. 23.]

   [382] Omitted in Lips.

   [383] [The imagery of our Lord's parables everywhere apparent. Also,
   the words of Scripture recur constantly.]

   [384] Jas. iv. 12. [Matt. xviii. 33.]

   [385] Ecclus. xx. 15, xli. 22; Jas. i. 5.

   [386] Cf. Donaldson's Hist. of Christ. Lit., vol. i. p. 291. [This
   beautiful chapter, and its parable of the fountains of living water,
   may well be read with that passage of Leighton which delighted
   Coleridge: Com. on 1 Pet. i. 10-12.]

   [387] diakonoi. [Deacons, evidently, or stewards. Acts vi. 1]

   [388] [Ezek. xxxiv. 3.]

   [389] Bishops. Bishops, that is, presidents of the churches.--Vat.
   [This textual peculiarity must have originated at the period when the
   Ignatian use of episcopus was becoming naturalized in Rome. It was
   originally common to all pastors, local or regionary.]

   [390] [This passage (with Vision iii. 2, and especially Similitude v.
   3) has been pressed into the service of those who seek to find
   "super-erogatory merit" in the Fathers. See 1 Cor. vii. 38. But why not
   begin with the Scriptures which Hermas doubtless has in mind, such as
   Rev. iii. 4, 5, "They are worthy"? Does this ascribe to them any merit
   apart from ("worthy is the Lamb") the only meritorious cause of
   salvation? So also Rev. vii. 14, xiv. 4, 5. The primitive Fathers
   accepted such truths like innocent children, and loved them. They
   believed St. Paul as to degrees of glory (1 Cor. xv. 41), and our Lord
   Himself as to the awards (Matt. xx. 21-23) of mercy to fruits of grace:
   and they are no more responsible for forced constructions that have
   been put upon them by afterthought and subsequent heresy, then our
   blessed Lord can be charged with all that has overloaded His precious
   sayings (Matt. xix. 12 or xiv. 18). The principle of deficient works of
   faith, which is the corresponding idea of the negative side, appears in
   St. Paul (1 Cor. iii. 13-15), and has been abused to sustain the whole
   system of creature merit, and the monstrous atfterthought of purgatory.
   Those, therefore, who read such ideas into "The Ante-Nicene Fathers,"
   to diminish their credit, often, unintentionally (1) help the
   perverters of truth to claim the Fathers, and (2) give them the like
   aid in claiming the Scriptures. See p. 34, supra, note 3.]

   [391] Matt. xviii. 3.

   [392] [Mark ix. 36.]

   [393] Here ends Codex Lipsiensis. The rest of the text is from common
   translation corrected by the Palatine and Æthiopic.

   [394] [Born good. Not in the text of Gebhardt and Harnack (the Greek is
   wanting); nor do they note any such text, though the Æthiopic favours
   it. See [1]p. 42, supra, note 2.]

   [395] [Here again the Latin has the reading before noted, on the
   circumcision of wealth, [2]p. 15, note 2, supra.]

   [396] Matt. xviii. 3, xix. 14.

   [397] [Jer. xiii. 20; Zech. xi. 15-17.]

   [398] [Jas. v. 9. Who can fail to feel the searching spirit of the
   gospel here? Matt. v. 23, 24, vi. 14.]

   [399] Servants of God. Servant of the Lord.--Æth.

   [400] [Heb. viii 12, x. 17.]
     

    Similitude Tenth.

      Concerning Repentance and Alms-Giving.

      Chap. I.

   After I had fully written down this book, that messenger who had
   delivered me to the Shepherd came into the house in which I was, and
   sat down upon a couch, and the Shepherd stood on his right hand. He
   then called me, and spoke to me as follows: "I have delivered you and
   your house to the Shepherd, that you may be protected by him." "Yes,
   sir," I said. "If you wish, therefore, to be protected," he said, "from
   all annoyance, and from all harsh treatment, and to have success in
   every good work and word, and to possess all the virtues of
   righteousness, walk in these commandments which he has given you, and
   you will be able to subdue all wickedness. For if you keep those
   commandments, every desire and pleasure of the world will be subject to
   you, and success will attend you in every good work. Take unto yourself
   his experience and moderation, and say to all that he is in great
   honour and dignity with God, and that he is a president with great
   power, and mighty in his office. To him alone throughout the whole
   world is the power of repentance assigned. Does he seem to you to be
   powerful? But you despise his experience, and the moderation which he
   exercises towards you."

      Chap. II.

   I said to him, "Ask himself, sir, whether from the time that he has
   entered my house I have done anything improper, or have offended him in
   any respect." He answered, "I also know that you neither have done nor
   will do anything improper, and therefore I speak these words to you,
   that you may persevere. For he had a good report of you to me, and you
   will say these words to others, that they also who have either repented
   or will still repent may entertain the same feelings with you, and he
   may report well of these to me, and I to the Lord." And I said, "Sir, I
   make known to every man the great works of God: and I hope that all
   those who love them, and have sinned before, on hearing these words,
   may repent, and receive life again." "Continue, therefore, in this
   ministry, and finish it. And all who follow out his commands shall have
   life, and great honour with the Lord. [401] But those who do not keep
   his commandments, flee from his life, and despise him. But he has his
   own honour with the Lord. All, therefore, who shall despise him, [402]
   and not follow his commands, deliver themselves to death, and every one
   of them will be guilty of his own blood. But I enjoin you, that you
   obey his commands, and you will have a cure for your former sins."

      Chap. III.

   "Moreover, I sent you these virgins, that they may dwell with you.
   [403] For I saw that they were courteous to you. You will therefore
   have them as assistants, that you may be the better able to keep his
   commands: for it is impossible that these commandments can be observed
   without these virgins. I see, moreover, that they abide with you
   willingly; but I will also instruct them not to depart at all from your
   house: do you only keep your house pure, as they will delight to dwell
   in a pure abode. For they are pure, and chaste, and industrious, and
   have all influence with the Lord. Therefore, if they find your house to
   be pure, they will remain with you; but if any defilement, even a
   little, befall it, they will immediately withdraw from your house. For
   these virgins do not at all like any defilement." I said to him, "I
   hope, sir, that I will please them, so that they may always be willing
   to inhabit my house. And as he to whom you entrusted me has no
   complaint against me, so neither will they have." He said to the
   Shepherd, "I see that the servant of God wishes to live, and to keep
   these commandments, and will place these virgins in a pure habitation."
   [404] When he had spoken these words he again delivered me to the
   Shepherd, and called those virgins, and said to them, "Since I see that
   you are willing to dwell in his house, I commend him and his house to
   you, asking that you withdraw not at all from it." And the virgins
   heard these words with pleasure.

      Chap. IV.

   The angel [405] then said to me, "Conduct yourself manfully in this
   service, and make known to every one the great things of God, [406] and
   you will have favour in this ministry. Whoever, therefore, shall walk
   in these commandments, shall have life, and will be happy in his life;
   but whosoever shall neglect them shall not have life, and will be
   unhappy in this life. Enjoin all, who are able to act rightly, not to
   cease well-doing; for, to practice good works is useful to them. [407]
   And I say that every man ought to be saved from inconveniences. For
   both he who is in want, and he who suffers inconveniences in his daily
   life, is in great torture and necessity. Whoever, therefore, rescues a
   soul of this kind from necessity, will gain for himself great joy. For
   he who is harassed by inconveniences of this kind, suffers equal
   torture with him who is in chains. Moreover many, on account of
   calamities of this sort, when they could not endure them, hasten their
   own deaths. Whoever, then, knows a calamity of this kind afflicting a
   man, and does not save him, commits a great sin, and becomes guilty of
   his blood. [408] Do good works, therefore, ye who have received good
   from the Lord; lest, while ye delay to do them, the building of the
   tower be finished, and you be rejected from the edifice: there is now
   no other tower a-building. For on your account was the work of building
   suspended. Unless, then, you make haste to do rightly, the tower will
   be completed, and you will be excluded."

   After he had spoken with me he rose up from the couch, and taking the
   Shepherd and the virgins, he departed. But he said to me that he would
   send back the Shepherd and the virgins to my dwelling. Amen. [409]
     

   [401] Lord. God.--Pal.

   [402] But he has his own honour ... despise him, omitted in Vat.

   [403] [Cap. xiii. p. 48, supra.]

   [404] [1 Pet. i. 22.]

   [405] Angel, Æth.; Pastor, Pal.; omitted in Vat.

   [406] God, common version; Lord, Æth., Pal.; Lord God, Vat.

   [407] [Here might follow that beautiful fragment of Irenaeus, on God's
   goodness accepting the feeblest efforts of the soul in drawing near to
   Him. Vol. i. Frag. lv. p. 577, this series.]

   [408] [Jas. v. 19, 20. As St. James concludes with this principle, so
   also Hermas, who evidently delights in this apostle's teaching and has
   thrown it into this allegorical metaphrase.]

   [409] The Vatican has: "Here ends the Book of the Shepherd, the
   disciple of the blessed apostle Paul. Thanks be to God." The Æthiopic
   has: "May the name of him who wrote this book be written on a pillar of
   gold. With thanksgiving to Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, this book of
   the prophet Hermas has been finished. Amen. Finished are the visions,
   and commandments, and similitudes of the prophet Hermas, who is Paul,
   in the year 191 of mercy, 23d night and 22d day of the month," etc. The
   writer goes on [fruitlessly] to show that Hermas is Paul, appealing to
   Acts xiv. 12.
     
     

  Elucidations.

    I.

   The reader has now had an opportunity of judging for himself whether
   the internal evidence favours any other view of the authorship of The
   Shepherd, than that which I have adopted. Its apparent design is to
   meet the rising pestilence of Montanism, and the perils of a secondary
   stage of Christianity. This it attempts to do by an imaginary voice
   from the first period. Avoiding controversy, Hermas presents, in the
   name of his earlier synonyme, a portraiture of the morals and practical
   godliness which were recognised as "the way of holiness" in the
   apostolic days. In so doing, he falls into anachronisms, of course, as
   poets and romancers must. These are sufficiently numerous to reveal the
   nature of his production, and to prove that the author was not the
   Hermas of the story.

   The authorship was a puzzle and a problem during the earlier
   discussions of the learned. An anonymous poem (falsely ascribed to
   Tertullian, but very ancient) did, indeed, give a clue to the
   solution:--


   "--deinde Pius, Hermas cui germine frater,

   Angelicus Pastor, quia tradita verba locutus."

   To say that there was no evidence to sustain this, is to grant that it
   doubles the evidence when sufficient support for it is discovered. This
   was supplied by the fragment found in Milan, by the erudite and
   indefatigable Muratori, about a hundred and fifty years ago. Its
   history, with very valuable notes on the fragment itself, which is
   given entire, may be found in Routh's Reliquiae. [410] Or the English
   reader may consult Westcott's very luminous statement of the case.
   [411] I am sorry that Dr. Donaldson doubts and objects; but he would
   not deny that experts, at least his equals, [412] accept the Muratorian
   Canon, which carries with it the historic testimony needed in the case
   of Hermas. All difficulties disappear in the light of this evidence.
   Hermas was brother of Pius, ninth Bishop of Rome (after Hyginus, circ.
   a.d. 157), and wrote his prose idyl under the fiction of his Pauline
   predecessor's name and age. This accounts (1) for the existence of the
   work, (2) for its form of allegory and prophesying, (3) for its
   anachronisms, (4) for its great currency, and (5) for its circulation
   among the Easterns, which was greater than it enjoyed in the West; and
   also (6) for their innocent mistake in ascribing it to the elder
   Hermas.

   1. The Phrygian enthusiasm, like the convulsionism of Paris [413] in
   the last century, was a phenomenon not to be trifled with; especially
   when it began to threaten the West. This work was produced to meet so
   great an emergency.

   2. "Fire fights fire," and prophesyings are best met by prophesyings.
   These were rare among the Orthodox, but Hermas undertook to restore
   those of the apostolic age; and I think this is what is meant by the
   tradita verba of the old poem, i.e., words "transmitted or bequeathed
   traditionally" from the times of Clement. Irenaeus, the contemporary of
   this Hermas, had received the traditions of the same age from Polycarp:
   hence the greater probability of my conjecture that the brother of Pius
   compiled many traditional prophesyings of the first age.

   3. Supposing the work to be in fact what it is represented to be in
   fiction, we have seen that it abounds with anachronisms. As now
   explained, we can account for them: the second Hermas forgets himself,
   like other poets, and mixes up his own period with that which he
   endeavours to portray.

   4 and 5. Written in Greek, its circulation in the West was necessarily
   limited; but, as the plague of Montanism was raging in the East, its
   Greek was a godsend, and enabled the Easterns to introduce it
   everywhere as a useful book. Origen values it as such; and, taking it
   without thought to be the work of the Pauline Hermas, attributes to it,
   as a fancy of his own, [414] that kind of inspiration which pertained
   to early "prophesyings." This conjecture once started, "it satisfied
   curiosity," says Westcott, "and supplied the place of more certain
   information; but, though it found acceptance, it acquired no new
   strength." [415]

   6. Eusebius and Jerome [416] merely repeat the report as an on dit, and
   on this slender authority it travelled down. The Pauline Hermas was
   credited with it; and the critics, in their researches, find multiplied
   traces of the one mistake, as did the traveller whose circuits became a
   beaten road under the hoofs of his own horse.

   If the reader will now turn back to the Introductory Note of the
   Edinburgh editors, he will find that the three views of which they take
   any serious notice are harmonized by that we have reached. (1) The work
   is unquestionably, on its face, the work of the Pauline Hermas. (2) But
   this is attributable to the fact that it is a fiction, or prose poem.
   (3) And hence it must be credited to the later Hermas, whose name and
   authorship are alone supported by external testimony, as well as
   internal evidence.

    II.

   (Similitude Ninth, cap. xi. p. 47, [3]note 1.)

   Westcott is undoubtedly correct in connecting this strange passage with
   one of the least defensible experiments of early Christian living.
   Gibbon finds in this experiment nothing but an opportunity for his
   scurrility. [417] A true philosopher will regard it very differently;
   and here, once and for all, we may speak of it somewhat at length. The
   young believer, a member, perhaps, of a heathen family, daily mixed up
   with abominable manners, forced to meet everywhere, by day, the
   lascivious hetaerae of the Greeks or those who are painted by Martial
   among the Latins, had no refuge but in flying to the desert, or
   practising the most heroic self-restraint if he remained with the
   relations and companions of his youth. If he went to the bath, it was
   to see naked women wallowing with vile men: if he slept upon the
   housetop, it was to throw down his mat or rug in a promiscuous stye of
   men and women. [418] This alike with rich and poor; but the latter were
   those among whom the Gospel found its more numerous recruits, and it
   was just these who were least able to protect themselves from
   pollutions. Their only resource was in that self-mastery, out of which
   sprung the Encraty of Tatian and the Montanism of Tertullian. Angelic
   purity was supposed to be attainable in this life; and the experiment
   was doubtless attended with some success, among the more resolute in
   fastings and prayer. Inevitably, however, what was "begun in the
   spirit," ended "in the flesh," in many instances. To live as brothers
   and sisters in the family of Christ, was a daring experiment;
   especially in such a social atmosphere, and amid the domestic habits of
   the heathen. Scandals ensued. Canonical censures were made stringent by
   the Church; and, while the vices of men and the peril of persecution
   multiplied the anchorites of the desert, this mischief was crushed out,
   and made impossible for Christians. "The sun-clad power of chastity,"
   which Hermas means to depict, was no doubt gloriously exemplified among
   holy men and women, in those heroic ages. The power of the Holy Ghost
   demonstrated, in many instances, how true it is, that, "to the pure,
   all things are pure." But the Gospel proscribes everything like
   presumption and "leading into temptation." The Church, in dealing with
   social evils, often encouraged a recourse to monasticism, in its pure
   form; but this also tended to corruption. To charge Christianity,
   however, with rash experiments of living which it never tolerated, is
   neither just nor philosophical. We have in it an example of the
   struggles of individuals out of heathenism,--by no means an institution
   of Christianity itself. It was a struggle, which, in its spirit,
   demands sympathy and respect. The Gospel has taught us to nauseate what
   even a regenerated heathen conceived to be praiseworthy, until the
   Christian family had become a developed product of the Church. [419]

   The Gospel arms its enemies against itself, by elevating them
   infinitely above what they would have been without its influences.
   Refined by its social atmosphere, but refusing its sanctifying power,
   they gloat over the failures and falls of those with whom their own
   emancipation was begun. Let us rather admire those whom she lifted out
   of an abyss of moral degradation, but whose struggles to reach the high
   levels of her precepts were not always successful. Yet these very
   struggles were heroic; for all their original habits, and all their
   surroundings, were of the sort "which hardens all within, and petrifies
   the feeling."

   The American editor has devoted more than his usual amount of
   annotation to Hermas, and he affectionately asks the student not to
   overlook the notes, in which he has condensed rather than amplified
   exposition. It has been a labour of love to contribute something to a
   just conception of The Shepherd, because the Primitive Age has often
   been reproached with its good repute in the early churches. So little
   does one generation comprehend another! When Christians conscientiously
   rejected the books of the heathen, and had as yet none of their own,
   save the Sacred Scriptures, or such scanty portions of the New
   Testament as were the treasures of the churches, is it wonderful that
   the first effort at Christian allegory was welcomed, especially in a
   time of need and perilous temptation?
     

   [410] Tom. i. pp. 393-434.

   [411] On the Canon, p. 235. Ed. 1855.

   [412] Such as Lightfoot, Westcott, Canon Cook, and others.

   [413] Candidly treated by Guettée, L'Eglise de France, vol. xii. p. 15.
   See also Parton's Voltaire, vol. i. pp. 260-270.

   [414] Comment., book x. sec. 31, as quoted in Westcott, p. 219.

   [415] I subjoin Westcott's references: Clem. Alex., Stromata, i. 17,
   sec. 85; Ibid., i. 29, sec. 29; Ibid., ii. 1, sec. 3. Also Ibid., ii.
   12, sec. 55; iv. 9. sec. 76; vi. 6, sec. 46. Also Tertull., Pudicitia,
   capp. 10 and 20. These I have verified in Ed. Oehler, pp. 468, 488. I
   add De Oratione, capp. xvi. p. 311. Let me also add Athanasius, De
   Incarnatione, p. 38; Contra Haeresim Arian., p. 369; Ibid., 380. To the
   testimony of this great Father and defender of the faith I attach the
   greatest importance; because his approval shows that there was nothing
   in the book, as he had it in its pure text, to justify the attempts of
   moderns to disprove its orthodoxy. Athanasius calls is "a most useful
   book," and quotes it again ("although that book is not in the Canon")
   with great respect. Ed. Paris, 1572. Modern theories of inspiration
   appear to me untenable, with reference to canonical Scripture; but they
   precisely illustrate the sort of inspiration with which these
   prophesyings were probably first credited. The human element is largely
   intermixed with divine suggestions; or you may state the proposition
   conversely.

   [416] Eusebius, iii. 3, and Hieronym., catal. x. See Westcott, p. 220.

   [417] Milman's Gibbon, vol. i. p. 550. The editor's notes are not over
   severe, and might be greatly strengthened as refutations.

   [418] Van Lennep, Bible-lands, p. 440.

   [419] See Vision iii. cap. 8, for the relation of encraty to faith, in
   the view of Hermas; also (cap. 7 and passim) note his uncompromising
   reproofs of lust, and his beautiful delineations of chastity. The third
   canon of the Nicene Synod proscribed the syneisactae, and also the
   nineteenth of Ancyra, adopted at Chalcedon into the Catholic
   discipline.