The Pastor
     

  Book Second.--Commandments.
     
     

    Commandment First.

      On Faith in God.

   First of all, believe [152] that there is one God who created and
   finished all things, and made all things out of nothing. He alone is
   able to contain the whole, but Himself cannot be contained. [153] Have
   faith therefore in Him, and fear Him; and fearing Him, exercise
   self-control. Keep these commands, and you will cast away from you all
   wickedness, and put on the strength of righteousness, and live to God,
   if you keep this commandment.
     

   [152] [These first words are quoted by Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 488, this
   series. Note that this book begins with the fundamental principle of
   faith, which is everywhere identified by Hermas (as in Vision ii. cap.
   2) with faith in the Son of God. The Holy Spirit is also everywhere
   exhibited in this work. But the careful student will discover a very
   deep plan in the treatment of this subject. Repentance and faith are
   the great themes, and the long-suffering of God, against the
   Montanists. But he begins by indicating the divine character and the
   law of God. He treats of sin in its relations to the law and the
   gospel: little by little, opening the way, he reaches a point, in the
   Eighth Similitude, where he introduces the New Law, identifying it,
   indeed, with the old, but magnifying the gospel of the Son of God.
   Hermas takes for granted the "Son of man;" but everywhere he avoids the
   names of His humanity, and brings out "the Son of God" with emphasis,
   in the spirit of St. John's Gospel (cap. i.) and of the Epistle to the
   Hebrews (cap. i.), as if he feared the familiarities even of believers
   in speaking of Jesus or of Christ, without recognising His eternal
   power and Godhead.]

   [153] Contained.--Vat. and Pal. add: and who cannot be defined in
   words, nor conceived by the mind. [Here we have the "Incomprehensible,"
   so familiar in the liturgic formula improperly called the Athanasian
   Creed. In the Latin immensus, in the Greek apeiros; i.e., "non
   mensurabilis, quiâ inlocalis, incircumscriptus, ubique totus, ubique
   proesens, ubique potens." Not intelligible is too frequently supposed
   to be the sense, but this is feeble and ambiguous. See Waterland,
   Works, iv. p. 320 London, 1823.]
     

    Commandment Second.

      On Avoiding Evil-Speaking, and on Giving Alms in Simplicity.

   He said to me, "Be simple and guileless, and you will be as the
   children who know not the wickedness that ruins the life of men. First,
   then, speak evil of no one, nor listen with pleasure to any one who
   speaks evil of another. But if you listen, you will partake of the sin
   of him who speaks evil, if you believe the slander which you hear;
   [154] for believing it, you will also have something to say against
   your brother. Thus, then, will you be guilty of the sin of him who
   slanders. For slander is evil [155] and an unsteady demon. It never
   abides in peace, but always remains in discord. Keep yourself from it,
   and you will always be at peace with all. Put on a holiness in which
   there is no wicked cause of offence, but all deeds that are equable and
   joyful. Practise goodness; and from the rewards of your labours, which
   God gives you, give to all the needy in simplicity, not hesitating as
   to whom you are to give or not to give. Give to all, for God wishes His
   gifts to be shared amongst all. They who receive, will render an
   account to God why and for what they have received. For the afflicted
   who receive will not be condemned, [156] but they who receive on false
   pretences will suffer punishment. He, then, who gives is guiltless. For
   as he received from the Lord, so has he accomplished his service in
   simplicity, not hesitating as to whom he should give and to whom he
   should not give. This service, then, if accomplished in simplicity, is
   glorious with God. He, therefore, who thus ministers in simplicity,
   will live to God. [157] Keep therefore these commandments, as I have
   given them to you, that your repentance and the repentance of your
   house may be found in simplicity, and your heart [158] may be pure and
   stainless."
     

   [154] If ... brother. [Jas. iv. 11.] And if you believe the slanderer,
   you will also be guilty of sin, in that you have belived one who speaks
   evil of your brother.--Vat. For if you give your assent to the
   detractor, and believe what is said of one in his absence, you also
   will be like to him, and acting ruinously towards your brother, and you
   are guilty of the same sin as the person who slanders.--Pal.

   [155] For slander is ruinous.--Vat. For it is wicked to slander any
   one.--Pal.

   [156] For ... condemned, omitted in Vat.

   [157] This service ... God. And he has accomplished this service to God
   simply and gloriously.--Vat. [Rom. xii. 8.]

   [158] The Vat. adds: and a blessing may fall on your house.
     

    Commandment Third.

      On Avoiding Falsehood, and on the Repentance of Hermas for His
      Dissimulation.

   Again he said to me, "Love the truth, and let nothing but truth proceed
   from your mouth, [159] that the spirit which God has placed in your
   flesh may be found truthful before all men; and the Lord, who dwelleth
   in you, [160] will be glorified, because the Lord is truthful in every
   word, and in Him is no falsehood. They therefore who lie deny the Lord,
   and rob Him, not giving back to Him the deposit which they have
   received. For they received from Him a spirit free from falsehood.
   [161] If they give him back this spirit untruthful, they pollute the
   commandment of the Lord, and become robbers." On hearing these words, I
   wept most violently. When he saw me weeping, he said to me, "Why do you
   weep?" And I said, "Because, sir, I know not if I can be saved." "Why?"
   said he. And I said, "Because, sir, I never spake a true word in my
   life, but have ever spoken cunningly to all, [162] and have affirmed a
   lie for the truth to all; and no one ever contradicted me, but credit
   was given to my word. How then can I live, since I have acted thus?"
   And he said to me, "Your feelings are indeed right and sound, for you
   ought as a servant of God to have walked in truth, and not to have
   joined an evil conscience with the spirit of truth, nor to have caused
   sadness to the holy and true Spirit." [163] And I said to him, "Never,
   sir, did I listen to these words with so much attention." And he said
   to me, "Now you hear them, and keep them, that even the falsehoods
   which you formerly told in your transactions may come to be believed
   through the truthfulness of your present statements. For even they can
   become worthy of credit. If you keep these precepts, and from this time
   forward you speak nothing but the truth, [164] it will be possible for
   you to obtain life. And whosoever shall hear this commandment, and
   depart from that great wickedness falsehood, shall live to God."
     

   [159] [Eph. iv. 25, 29.]

   [160] Dwelleth in you. Who put the spirit within you.--Vat.

   [161] [The seven gifts of the Spirit are here referred to, especially
   the gift of "true godliness," with a reference to the parable of the
   talents (Matt. xxv. 15), and also to 1 John ii. 20-27.]

   [162] Cunningly to all. Have ever lived in dissimulation.--Vat. Lived
   cunningly with all.--Pal. [Custom-house oaths and business lies among
   moderns.]

   [163] The Vat. adds: of God. [1 John iii. 19-21, iv. 6, and Eph. iv.
   30.]

   [164] For ... truth. For even they can become worthy of credit, if you
   will speak the truth in future; and if you keep the truth.--Vat. [See,
   under the Tenth Mandate, p. 26, in this book.]
     

    Commandment Fourth.

      On Putting One's Wife Away for Adultery.

      Chap. I.

   "I charge you," said he, "to guard your chastity, and let no thought
   enter your heart of another man's wife, or of fornication, or of
   similar iniquities; for by doing this you commit a great sin. But if
   you always remember your own wife, you will never sin. For if this
   thought [165] enter your heart, then you will sin; and if, in like
   manner, you think other wicked thoughts, you commit sin. For this
   thought is great sin in a servant of God. But if any one commit this
   wicked deed, he works death for himself. Attend, therefore, and refrain
   from this thought; for where purity dwells, there iniquity ought not to
   enter the heart of a righteous man." I said to him, "Sir, permit me to
   ask you a few questions." [166] "Say on," said he. And I said to him,
   "Sir, if any one has a wife who trusts in the Lord, and if he detect
   her in adultery, does the man sin if he continue to live with her?" And
   he said to me, "As long as he remains ignorant of her sin, the husband
   commits no transgression in living with her. But if the husband know
   that his wife has gone astray, and if the woman does not repent, but
   persists in her fornication, and yet the husband continues to live with
   her, he also is guilty of her crime, and a sharer in her adultery." And
   I said to him, "What then, sir, is the husband to do, if his wife
   continue in her vicious practices?" And he said, "The husband should
   put her away, and remain by himself. But if he put his wife away and
   marry another, he also commits adultery." [167] And I said to him,
   "What if the woman put away should repent, and wish to return to her
   husband: shall she not be taken back by her husband?" And he said to
   me, "Assuredly. If the husband do not take her back, he sins, and
   brings a great sin upon himself; for he ought to take back the sinner
   who has repented. But not frequently. [168] For there is but one
   repentance to the servants of God. In case, therefore, that the
   divorced wife may repent, the husband ought not to marry another, when
   his wife has been put away. In this matter man and woman are to be
   treated exactly in the same way. Moreover, adultery is committed not
   only by those who pollute their flesh, but by those who imitate the
   heathen in their actions. [169] Wherefore if any one [170] persists in
   such deeds, and repents not, withdraw from him, and cease to live with
   him, otherwise you are a sharer in his sin. Therefore has the
   injunction been laid on you, that you should remain by yourselves, both
   man and woman, for in such persons repentance can take place. But I do
   not," said he, "give opportunity for the doing of these deeds, but that
   he who has sinned may sin no more. But with regard to his previous
   transgressions, there is One who is able to provide a cure; [171] for
   it is He, indeed, who has power over all."

      Chap. II.

   I asked him again, and said, "Since the Lord has vouchsafed to dwell
   always with me, bear with me while I utter a few words; [172] for I
   understand nothing, and my heart has been hardened by my previous mode
   of life. Give me understanding, for I am exceedingly dull, and I
   understand absolutely nothing." And he answered and said unto me, "I am
   set over repentance, and I give understanding to all who repent. Do you
   not think," he said, "that it is great wisdom to repent? for repentance
   is great wisdom. [173] For he who has sinned understands that he acted
   wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and remembers the actions he has
   done, and he repents, and no longer acts wickedly, but does good
   munificently, and humbles and torments his soul because he has sinned.
   You see, therefore, that repentance is great wisdom." And I said to
   him, "It is for this reason, sir, that I inquire carefully into all
   things, especially because I am a sinner; that I may know what works I
   should do, that I may live: for my sins are many and various." And he
   said to me, "You shall live if you keep my commandments, [174] and walk
   in them; and whosoever shall hear and keep these commandments, shall
   live to God."

      Chap. III.

   And I said to him, "I should like to continue my questions." "Speak
   on," said he. And I said, "I heard, sir, some teachers maintain that
   there is no other repentance than that which takes place, when we
   descended into the water [175] and received remission of our former
   sins." He said to me, "That was sound doctrine which you heard; for
   that is really the case. For he who has received remission of his sins
   ought not to sin any more, but to live in purity. Since, however, you
   inquire diligently into all things, I will point this also out to you,
   not as giving occasion for error to those who are to believe, or have
   lately believed, in the Lord. For those who have now believed, and
   those who are to believe, have not repentance for their sins; but they
   have remission of their previous sins. For to those who have been
   called before these days, the Lord has set repentance. For the Lord,
   knowing the heart, and foreknowing all things, knew the weakness of men
   and the manifold wiles of the devil, that he would inflict some evil on
   the servants of God, and would act wickedly towards them. [176] The
   Lord, therefore, being merciful, has had mercy on the work of His hand,
   and has set repentance for them; and He has entrusted to me power over
   this repentance. And therefore I say to you, that if any one is tempted
   by the devil, and sins after that great and holy calling in which the
   Lord has called His people to everlasting life, [177] he has
   opportunity to repent but once. But if he should sin frequently after
   this, and then repent, to such a man his repentance will be of no
   avail; for with difficulty will he live." [178] And I said, "Sir, I
   feel that life has come back to me in listening attentively to these
   commandments; for I know that I shall be saved, if in future I sin no
   more." And he said, "You will be saved, you and all who keep these
   commandments."

      Chap. IV.

   And again I asked him, saying, "Sir, since you have been so patient in
   listening to me, will you show me this also?" "Speak," said he. And I
   said, "If a wife or husband die, and the widower or widow marry, does
   he or she commit sin?" "There is no sin in marrying again," said he;
   "but if they remain unmarried, they gain greater honour and glory with
   the Lord; but if they marry, they do not sin. [179] Guard, therefore,
   your chastity and purity, and you will live to God. What commandments I
   now give you, and what I am to give, keep from henceforth, yea, from
   the very day when you were entrusted to me, and I will dwell in your
   house. And your former sins will be forgiven, if you keep my
   commandments. And all shall be forgiven who keep these my commandments,
   and walk in this chastity."
     

   [165] This thought. [Matt. v. 28. See, further, Simil. ix. cap. II.]
   The thought of another man's wife or of fornication.

   [166] Questions. "I charge you," said he, "to guard your chastity, and
   let no thought enter your heart of another man's marriage (i.e., wife),
   or of fornication, for this produces a great transgression. But be
   always mindful of the Lord at all hours, and you will never sin. For if
   this very wicked thought enter your heart, you commit a great sin, and
   they who practice such deeds follow the way of death. Take heed,
   therefore, and refrain from this thought. For where chastity remains in
   the heart of a righteous man, never ought there to arise any evil
   thought." I said to him," Sir, permit me to say a few words to you."
   "Say on," said he.--Vat.

   [167] Matt. v. 32, xix. 9.

   [168] [Not frequently ... one repentance. True penitence is a habit of
   life. An apparent safe-guard against the reproaches of Montanism, and a
   caution not to turn forgiveness into a momentary sponge without
   avoiding renewed transgression.]

   [169] Who ... actions. But he who makes an image also commits
   adultery.--Vat.

   [170] Any one. She.--Vat. [2 Thess. iii. 14; 2 John 11.]

   [171] There ... cure. God, who has power to heal, will provide a
   remedy.--Vat. [This whole passage seems to refer to the separation of
   penitents under canonical discipline. Tertullian, Pudicit., capp. 5,
   13, and De Penitent., cap. 9. 2 Thess. iii. 14.]

   [172] Bear ... words. Give me a few words of explanation.--Vat.

   [173] Repentance ... wisdom. For he who repents obtains great
   intelligence. For he feels that he has sinned and acted wickedly.--Vat.
   ["Wisdom and understanding;" spiritual gifts here instanced as
   requisite to true penitence and spiritual life.]

   [174] [Matt. xix. 17. Saint-Pierre, Harm. de la Nature, iii. p. 150.]

   [175] [Immersion continues to be the usage, then, even in the West, at
   this epoch.]

   [176] For ... them. Since God knows the thoughts of all hearts, and the
   weakness of men, and the manifold wickedness of the devil which he
   practices in plotting against the servants of God, and in malignant
   designs against them.--Vat.

   [177] In ... life. These words occur only in Pal. [Can the following
   words be genuine? They reflect the very Montanism here so strictly
   opposed. Wake has followed a very different text. The Scriptures, it is
   true, use very awful language of the same kind: Heb. x. 26, 27; xii.
   16, 17; 1 John iii. 9.

   [178] With ... live. With difficulty will he live to God.--Vat. And
   Pal.

   [179] [1 Cor. vii. 39; Rom. vii. 3. See my note on Simil. ix. cap. 28.
   Here are touching illustrations of the new spirit as to the sanctity of
   marriage, to which the Gospel was awakening the heathen mind.]
     

    Commandment Fifth.

      Of Sadness of Heart, and of Patience.

      Chap. I.

   "Be patient," said he, "and of good understanding, and you will rule
   over every wicked work, and you will work all righteousness. For if you
   be patient, the Holy Spirit that dwells in you will be pure. He will
   not be darkened by any evil spirit, but, dwelling in a broad region,
   [180] he will rejoice and be glad; and with the vessel in which he
   dwells he will serve God in gladness, having great peace within
   himself. [181] But if any outburst of anger take place, forthwith the
   Holy Spirit, who is tender, is straitened, not having a pure place, and
   He seeks to depart. For he is choked by the vile spirit, and cannot
   attend on the Lord as he wishes, for anger pollutes him. For the Lord
   dwells in long-suffering, but the devil in anger. [182] The two
   spirits, then, when dwelling in the same habitation, are at discord
   with each other, and are troublesome to that man in whom they dwell.
   [183] For if an exceedingly small piece of wormwood be taken and put
   into a jar of honey, is not the honey entirely destroyed, and does not
   the exceedingly small piece of wormwood entirely take away the
   sweetness of the honey, so that it no longer affords any gratification
   to its owner, but has become bitter, and lost its use? But if the
   wormwood be not put into the honey, then the honey remains sweet, and
   is of use to its owner. You see, then, that patience is sweeter than
   honey, and useful to God, and the Lord dwells in it. But anger is
   bitter and useless. Now, if anger be mingled with patience, the
   patience is polluted, [184] and its prayer is not then useful to God."
   "I should like, sir," said I, "to know the power of anger, that I may
   guard myself against it." And he said, "If you do not guard yourself
   against it, you and your house lose all hope of salvation. Guard
   yourself, therefore, against it. For I am with you, and all will depart
   from it who repent with their whole heart. [185] For I will be with
   them, and I will save them all. For all are justified by the most holy
   angel." [186]

      Chap. II.

   "Hear now," said he, "how wicked is the action of anger, and in what
   way it overthrows the servants of God by its action, and turns them
   from righteousness. But it does not turn away those who are full of
   faith, nor does it act on them, for the power of the Lord is with them.
   It is the thoughtless and doubting that it turns away. [187] For as
   soon as it sees such men standing stedfast, it throws itself into their
   hearts, and for nothing at all the man or woman becomes embittered on
   account of occurrences in their daily life, as for instance on account
   of their food, or some superfluous word that has been uttered, or on
   account of some friend, or some gift or debt, or some such senseless
   affair. For all these things are foolish and empty and unprofitable to
   the servants of God. But patience is great, and mighty, and strong, and
   calm in the midst of great enlargement, joyful, rejoicing, free from
   care, glorifying God at all times, having no bitterness in her, and
   abiding continually meek and quiet. Now this patience dwells with those
   who have complete faith. But anger is foolish, and fickle, and
   senseless. Now, of folly is begotten bitterness, and of bitterness
   anger, and of anger frenzy. This frenzy, the product of so many evils,
   ends in great and incurable sin. For when all these spirits dwell in
   one vessel in which the Holy Spirit also dwells, the vessel cannot
   contain them, but overflows. The tender Spirit, then, not being
   accustomed to dwell with the wicked spirit, nor with hardness,
   withdraws from such a man, and seeks to dwell with meekness and
   peacefulness. Then, when he withdraws from the man in whom he dwelt,
   the man is emptied of the righteous Spirit; and being henceforward
   filled with evil spirits, [188] he is in a state of anarchy in every
   action, being dragged hither and thither by the evil spirits, and there
   is a complete darkness in his mind as to everything good. This, then,
   is what happens to all the angry. Wherefore do you depart from that
   most wicked spirit anger, and put on patience, and resist anger and
   bitterness, and you will be found in company with the purity which is
   loved by the Lord. [189] Take care, then, that you neglect not by any
   chance this commandment: for if you obey this commandment, you will be
   able to keep all the other commandments which I am to give you. Be
   strong, then, in these commandments, and put on power, and let all put
   on power, as many as wish to walk in them." [190]
     

   [180] It will be noticed that space is attributed to the heart or soul,
   and that joy and goodness expand the heart, and produce width, while
   sadness and wickedness contract and straiten.

   [181] But ... himself. But rejoicing he will be expanded, and he will
   feast in the vessel in which he dwells, and he will serve the Lord
   joyfully in the midst of great peace.--Vat. He will serve the Lord in
   great gladness, having abundance of all things within himself.--Pal.

   [182] For ... anger, omitted in Vat.; fuller in Pal.: For the Lord
   dwells in calmness and greatness of mind, but anger is the devil's
   house of entertainment. [Eph. iv. 26, 27.]

   [183] [Jas iii. 11.]

   [184] Patience if polluted. The mind is distressed.--Vat.; omitted in
   Pal.

   [185] I ... heart. I, the angel [or messenger] of righteousness, am
   with you, and all who depart from anger, and repent with their whole
   heart, will live to God.--Vat.

   [186] Are justified. Are received into the number of the just by the
   most holy angel (or messenger).--Pal. [i.e., As the instrument of
   justification; but the superlative here used seems to indentify this
   angel with that of the covenant (Mal. iii. 1); i.e., the meritorious
   cause, "the Lord."]

   [187] Hear ... away. "Hear now," said he, "how great is the wickedness
   of anger, and how injurious, and in what way it overthrows the servants
   of God. For they who are full of faith receive no harm from it, for the
   power of God is with them; for it is the doubters and those destitute
   [of faith] that it overturns."--Vat. [The philosophic difference
   between anger and indignation is here in view.]

   [188] [Matt. xii. 45; Luke xi. 26.]

   [189] You ... Lord. You will be found by God in the company of purity
   and chastity.--Vat.

   [190] And put ... them. That you may live to God, and they who keep
   these commandments will live to God.--Vat. [The beauty of this chapter
   must be felt by all, especially in the eulogy on patience. A pious and
   learned critic remarks on the emphasis and frequent recurrence of
   scriptural exhortations to patience, which he thinks have been to
   little enlarged upon in Christian literature.]
     

    Commandment Sixth.

      How to Recognise the Two Spirits Attendant on Each Man, and How to
      Distinguish the Suggestions of the One from Those of the Other.

      Chap. I.

   "I gave you," he said, "directions in the first commandment to attend
   to faith, and fear, and self-restraint." "Even so, sir," said I. And he
   said, "Now I wish to show you the powers of these, that you may know
   what power each possesses. For their powers are double, and have
   relation alike to the righteous and the unrighteous. Trust you,
   therefore, the righteous, but put no trust in the unrighteous. For the
   path of righteousness is straight, but that of unrighteousness is
   crooked. But walk in the straight and even way, and mind not the
   crooked. For the crooked path has no roads, but has many pathless
   places and stumbling-blocks in it, and it is rough and thorny. It is
   injurious to those who walk therein. But they who walk in the straight
   road walk evenly without stumbling, because it is neither rough nor
   thorny. You see, then, that it is better to walk in this road." "I wish
   to go by this road," said I. "You will go by it," said he; "and whoever
   turns to the Lord with all his heart will walk in it."

      Chap. II.

   "Hear now," said he, "in regard to faith. There are two angels [191]
   with a man--one of righteousness, and the other of iniquity." And I
   said to him, "How, sir, am I to know the powers of these, for both
   angels dwell with me?" "Hear," said he, and "understand them. The angel
   of righteousness is gentle and modest, meek and peaceful. When,
   therefore, he ascends into your heart, forthwith [192] he talks to you
   of righteousness, purity, chastity, contentment, and of every righteous
   deed and glorious virtue. When all these ascend into your heart, know
   that the angel of righteousness is with you. These are the deeds of the
   angel of righteousness. Trust him, then, and his works. Look now at the
   works of the angel of iniquity. First, he is wrathful, and bitter, and
   foolish, and his works are evil, and ruin the servants of God. When,
   then, he ascends into your heart, know him by his works." And I said to
   him, "How, sir, I shall perceive him, I do not know." "Hear and
   understand" said he. "When anger comes upon you, or harshness, know
   that he is in you; and you will know this to be the case also, when you
   are attacked by a longing after many transactions, [193] and the
   richest delicacies, and drunken revels, and divers luxuries, and things
   improper, and by a hankering after women, and by overreaching, and
   pride, and blustering, and by whatever is like to these. When these
   ascend into your heart, know that the angel of iniquity is in you. Now
   that you know his works, depart from him, and in no respect trust him,
   because his deeds are evil, and unprofitable to the servants of God.
   These, then, are the actions of both angels. Understand them, and trust
   the angel of righteousness; but depart from the angel of iniquity,
   because his instruction is bad in every deed. [194] For though a man be
   most faithful, [195] and the thought of this angel ascend into his
   heart, that man or woman must sin. On the other hand, be a man or woman
   ever so bad, yet, if the works of the angel of righteousness ascend
   into his or her heart, he or she must do something good. You see,
   therefore, that it is good to follow the angel of righteousness, but to
   bid farewell [196] to the angel of iniquity."

   "This commandment exhibits the deeds of faith, that you may trust the
   works of the angel of righteousness, and doing them you may live to
   God. But believe the works of the angel of iniquity are hard. If you
   refuse to do them, you will live to God."
     

   [191] [See Tob. iii. 8, 17. The impure spirit, and the healing angel.
   This apocryphal book greatly influenced the Church's ideas of angels,
   and may have suggested this early reference to one's good and evil
   angel. The mediaeval ideas on this subject are powerfully illustrated in
   the German legends preserved by Sir. W. Scott in The Wild Huntsman and
   The Fire-King.]

   [192] Forthwith ... heart, omitted in Lips.

   [193] Transactions. I think the writer means, when a longing is felt to
   engage with too great devotedness to business and the pursuit of
   wealth. ["That ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction." 1 Cor.
   vii. 35.]

   [194] Trust ... deed. Trust the angel of righteousness, beacause his
   instruction is good.--Vat.

   [195] Faithful. Most happy.--Vat.

   [196] But to bid farewell. The Vat. ends quite differently from this
   point: If, then, you follow him, and trust to his works, you will live
   to God; and they who trust to his works will live to God.--Vat.
     

    Commandment Seventh.

      On Fearing God, and Not Fearing the Devil.

   "Fear," said he, "the Lord, and keep His commandments. [197] For if you
   keep the commandments of God, you will be powerful in every action, and
   every one of your actions will be incomparable. For, fearing the Lord,
   you will do all things well. This is the fear which you ought to have,
   that you may be saved. But fear not the devil; for, fearing the Lord,
   you will have dominion over the devil, for there is no power in him.
   But he in whom there is no power ought on no account to be an object of
   fear; but He in whom there is glorious power is truly to be feared. For
   every one that has power ought to be feared; but he who has not power
   is despised by all. Fear, therefore, the deeds of the devil, since they
   are wicked. For, fearing the Lord, you will not do these deeds, but
   will refrain from them. For fears are of two kinds: [198] for if you do
   not wish to do that which is evil, fear the Lord, and you will not do
   it; but, again, if you wish to do that which is good, fear the Lord,
   and you will do it. Wherefore the fear of the Lord is strong, and
   great, and glorious. Fear, then, the Lord, and you will live to Him,
   and as many as fear Him and keep His commandments will live to God."
   "Why," [199] said I, "sir, did you say in regard to those that keep His
   commandments, that they will live to God?" "Because," says he, "all
   creation fears the Lord, but all creation does not keep His
   commandments. They only who fear the Lord and keep His commandments
   have life with God; [200] but as to those who keep not His
   commandments, there is no life in them."
     

   [197] Eccles. xii. 13.

   [198] [Prov. xxviii. 14; 1 John iv. 18. This chapter seems based on
   Jas. iv. 7.]

   [199] Why ... they only who fear the Lord, omitted in Vat.

   [200] God. Lord.--Vat.
     

    Commandment Eighth.

      We Ought to Shun that Which is Evil, and Do that Which is Good.

   "I told you," said he, "that the creatures of God are double, [201] for
   restraint also is double; for in some cases restraint has to be
   exercised, in others there is no need of restraint." "Make known to me,
   sir," say I, "in what cases restraint has to be exercised, and in what
   cases it has not." "Restrain yourself in regard to evil, and do it not;
   but exercise no restraint in regard to good, but do it. For if you
   exercise restraint in the doing of good, you will commit a great sin;
   [202] but if you exercise restraint, so as not to do that which is
   evil, you are practising great righteousness. Restrain yourself,
   therefore, from all iniquity, and do that which is good." "What, sir,"
   say I, "are the evil deeds from which we must restrain ourselves?"
   "Hear," says he: "from adultery and fornication, from unlawful
   revelling, [203] from wicked luxury, from indulgence in many kinds of
   food and the extravagance of riches, and from boastfulness, and
   haughtiness, and insolence, and lies, and backbiting, and hypocrisy,
   from the remembrance of wrong, and from all slander. These are the
   deeds that are most wicked in the life of men. From all these deeds,
   therefore, the servant of God must restrain himself. For he who does
   not restrain himself from these, cannot live to God. Listen, then, to
   the deeds that accompany these." "Are there, sir," said I, "any other
   evil deeds?" "There are," says he; "and many of them, too, from which
   the servant of God must restrain himself--theft, lying, robbery, false
   witness, overreaching, wicked lust, deceit, vainglory, boastfulness,
   and all other vices like to these." "Do you not think that these are
   really wicked?" "Exceedingly wicked in the servants of God. From all of
   these the servant of God must restrain himself. Restrain yourself,
   then, from all these, that you may live to God, and you will be
   enrolled amongst those who restrain themselves in regard to these
   matters. These, then, are the things from which you must restrain
   yourself."

   "But listen," says he, "to the things in regard to which you have not
   to exercise self-restraint, but which you ought to do. Restrain not
   yourself in regard to that which is good, but do it." "And tell me,
   sir," say I, "the nature of the good deeds, that I may walk in them and
   wait on them, so that doing them I can be saved." "Listen," says he,
   "to the good deeds which you ought to do, and in regard to which there
   is no self-restraint requisite. First of all [204] there is faith, then
   fear of the Lord, love, concord, words of righteousness, truth,
   patience. Than these, nothing is better in the life of men. If any one
   attend to these, and restrain himself not from them, blessed is he in
   his life. Then there are the following attendant on these: helping
   widows, looking after orphans and the needy, rescuing the servants of
   God from necessities, the being hospitable--for in hospitality
   good-doing finds a field--never opposing any one, the being quiet,
   having fewer needs than all men, reverencing the aged, practising
   righteousness, watching the brotherhood, bearing insolence, being
   long-suffering, encouraging those who are sick in soul, not casting
   those who have fallen into sin from the faith, but turning them back
   and restoring them to peace of mind, admonishing sinners, not
   oppressing debtors and the needy, and if there are any other actions
   like these. [205] Do these seem to you good?" says he. "For what, sir,"
   say I, "is better than these?" "Walk then in them," says he, "and
   restrain not yourself from them, and you will live to God. [206] Keep,
   therefore, this commandment. If you do good, and restrain not yourself
   from it, you will live to God. All who act thus will live to God. And,
   again, if you refuse to do evil, and restrain yourself from it, you
   will live to God. And all will live to God who keep these commandments,
   and walk in them."
     

   [201] [Command. vi. cap. i. p. 24, supra. The idea taken from Ecclus.
   xxxiii. 15, and Eccles. vii. 14.]

   [202] For ... sin, omitted in Lips.

   [203] [Gal. v. 10, 21; 1 Pet. iv. 3.]

   [204] [First of all, faith, holy fear, love etc. Then, works of mercy.
   Could evangelical morality be more beautifully illustrated?]

   [205] [1 Pet. iv. 9. Who does not feel humbled and instructed by these
   rules of holy living. No wonder Athanasius, while rejecting it from the
   canon (Contra Haeresim Arian., p. 380) calls this a "most useful book."
   De Incarnatione, p. 38. Paris, 1537.]

   [206] From them ... all who act thus will live to God, omitted in Vat.,
   which ends thus: If you keep all these commandments, you will live to
   God, and all who keep these commandments will live to God.
     

    Commandment Ninth.

      Prayer Must Be Made to God Without Ceasing, and with Unwavering
      Confidence.

   He says to me, "Put away doubting from you and do not hesitate to ask
   of the Lord, saying to yourself, How can I ask of the Lord and receive
   from Him, seeing I have sinned so much against Him? Do not thus reason
   with yourself, but with all your heart turn to the Lord and ask of Him
   without doubting, and you will know the multitude of His tender
   mercies; that He will never leave you, but fulfil the request of your
   soul. For He is not like men, who remember evils done against them; but
   He Himself remembers not evils, and has compassion on His own creature.
   Cleanse, therefore, your heart from all the vanities of this world, and
   from the words already mentioned, and ask of the Lord and you will
   receive all, and in none of your requests will you be denied which you
   make to the Lord without doubting. But if you doubt in your heart, you
   will receive none of your requests. For those who doubt regarding God
   are double-souled, and obtain not one of their requests. [207] But
   those who are perfect in faith ask everything, trusting in the Lord;
   and they obtain, because they ask nothing doubting, and not being
   double-souled. For every double-souled man, even if he repent, will
   with difficulty be saved. [208] Cleanse your heart, therefore, from all
   doubt, and put on faith, because it is strong, and trust God that you
   will obtain from Him all that you ask. And if at any time, after you
   have asked of the Lord, you are slower in obtaining your request [than
   you expected], do not doubt because you have not soon obtained the
   request of your soul; for invariably it is on account of some
   temptation or some sin of which you are ignorant that you are slower in
   obtaining your request. Wherefore do not cease to make the request of
   your soul, and you will obtain it. But if you grow weary and waver in
   your request, blame yourself, and not Him who does not give to you.
   Consider this doubting state of mind, for it is wicked and senseless,
   and turns many away entirely from the faith, even though they be very
   strong. For this doubting is the daughter of the devil, and acts
   exceedingly wickedly to the servants of God. Despise, then, doubting,
   and gain the mastery over it in everything; clothing yourself with
   faith, which is strong and powerful. For faith promises all things,
   perfects all things; but doubt having no thorough faith in itself,
   fails in every work which it undertakes. You see, then," says he,
   "that, faith is from above--from the Lord [209] --and has great power;
   but doubt is an earthly spirit, coming from the devil, and has no
   power. Serve, then, that which has power, namely faith, and keep away
   from doubt, which has no power, and you will live to God. And all will
   live to God whose minds have been set on these things."
     

   [207] [Jas. i. 6-8 is here the text of the Shepherd's comment.]

   [208] With difficulty be saved. Will with difficulty live to God.--Vat.

   [209] Lord. God.--Vat.
     

    Commandment Tenth.

      Of Grief, and Not Grieving the Spirit of God Which is in Us.

      Chap. I.

   "Remove from you," says he, "grief; for she is the sister of doubt and
   anger." "How, sir," say I, "is she the sister of these? for anger,
   doubt, and grief seem to be quite different from each other." "You are
   senseless, O man. Do you not perceive that grief is more wicked than
   all the spirits, and most terrible to the servants of God, and more
   than all other spirits destroys man and crushes out the Holy Spirit,
   and yet, on the other hand, she saves him?" "I am senseless, sir," say
   I, "and do not understand these parables. For how she can crush out,
   and on the other hand save, I do not perceive." "Listen," says he.
   "Those who have never searched for the truth, nor investigated the
   nature of the Divinity, but have simply believed, when they devote
   themselves to and become mixed up with business, and wealth, and
   heathen friendships, and many other actions of this world, [210] do not
   perceive the parables of Divinity; for their minds are darkened by
   these actions, and they are corrupted and become dried up. Even as
   beautiful vines, when they are neglected, are withered up by thorns and
   divers plants, so men who have believed, and have afterwards fallen
   away into many of those actions above mentioned, go astray in their
   minds, and lose all understanding in regard to righteousness; for if
   they hear of righteousness, their minds are occupied with their
   business, [211] and they give no heed at all. Those, on the other hand,
   who have the fear of God, and search after Godhead and truth, and have
   their hearts turned to the Lord, quickly perceive and understand what
   is said to them, because they have the fear of the Lord in them. For
   where the Lord dwells, there is much understanding. Cleave, then, to
   the Lord, and you will understand and perceive all things."

      Chap. II.

   "Hear, then," says he, "foolish man, how grief crushes out the Holy
   Spirit, and on the other hand saves. When the doubting man attempts any
   deed, and fails in it on account of his doubt, this grief enters into
   the man, and grieves the Holy Spirit, and crushes him out. Then, on the
   other hand, when anger attaches itself to a man in regard to any
   matter, and he is embittered, then grief enters into the heart of the
   man who was irritated, and he is grieved at the deed which he did, and
   repents that he has wrought a wicked deed. This grief, then, appears to
   be accompanied by salvation, because the man, after having done a
   wicked deed, repented. [212] Both actions grieve the Spirit: doubt,
   because it did not accomplish its object; and anger grieves the Spirit,
   because it did what was wicked. Both these are grievous to the Holy
   Spirit--doubt and anger. Wherefore remove grief from you, and crush not
   the Holy Spirit which dwells in you, lest he entreat God [213] against
   you, and he withdraw from you. For the Spirit of God which has been
   granted to us to dwell in this body does not endure grief nor
   straitness. Wherefore put on cheerfulness, which always is agreeable
   and acceptable to God, [214] and rejoice in it. For every cheerful man
   does what is good, and minds what is good, and despises grief; [215]
   but the sorrowful man always acts wickedly. First, he acts wickedly
   because he grieves the Holy Spirit, which was given to man a cheerful
   Spirit. Secondly, grieving the Holy Spirit, [216] he works iniquity,
   neither entreating the Lord nor confessing [217] to Him. For the
   entreaty of the sorrowful man has no power to ascend to the altar of
   God." "Why," say I, "does not the entreaty of the grieved man ascend to
   the altar?" "Because," says he, "grief sits in his heart. Grief, then,
   mingled with his entreaty, does not permit the entreaty to ascend pure
   to the altar of God. For as vinegar and wine, when mixed in the same
   vessel, do not give the same pleasure [as wine alone gives], so grief
   mixed with the Holy Spirit does not produce the same entreaty [as would
   be produced by the Holy Spirit alone]. Cleanse yourself from this
   wicked grief, and you will live to God; and all will live to God who
   drive away grief from them, and put on all cheerfulness." [218]
     

   [210] The Vat. has here a considerable number of sentences, found in
   the Greek, the Palatine, and the Æthiopic, in Commandment Eleventh. In
   consequence of this transference, the Eleventh Commandment in the
   Vatican differs considerably from the others in the position of the
   sentences, but otherwise it is substantially the same.

   [211] And ... business. This part is omitted in the Leipzig Codex, and
   is supplied from the Latin and Æthiopic translation. [Luke viii. 14.]

   [212] This ... repented, omitted in Vat. [2 Cor. vii. 10. Compare this
   Commandment in Wake's translation and notes.]

   [213] God. The Lord.--Vat., Æth.

   [214] God. The Lord.--Vat.

   [215] Grief. Injustice.--Vat.

   [216] [Eph. iv. 30.]

   [217] exomologhoumenos one would expect here to mean "giving thanks," a
   meaning which it has in the New Testament: but as exomologoumai means
   to "confess" throughout the Pastor of Hermas, it is likely that it
   means "confessing" here also.

   [218] [Matt. vi. 16, 17: Is. lviii. 5; 2 Cor. vi. 10; John xvi. 33;
   Rom. xii. 8.]
     

    Commandment Eleventh.

      The Spirit and Prophets to Be Tried by Their Works; Also of the Two Kinds
      of Spirit.

   He pointed out to me some men sitting on a seat, and one man sitting on
   a chair. And he says to me, "Do you see the persons sitting on the
   seat?" "I do, sir," said I. "These," says he, "are the faithful, and he
   who sits on the chair is a false prophet, ruining the minds of the
   servants of God. [219] It is the doubters, not the faithful, that he
   ruins. These doubters then go to him as to a soothsayer, and inquire of
   him what will happen to them; and he, the false prophet, not having the
   power of a Divine Spirit in him, answers them according to their
   inquiries, and according to their wicked desires, and fills their souls
   with expectations, according to their own wishes. For being himself
   empty, he gives empty answers to empty inquirers; for every answer is
   made to the emptiness of man. Some true words he does occasionally
   utter; for the devil fills him with his own spirit, in the hope that he
   may be able to overcome some of the righteous. As many, then, as are
   strong in the faith of the Lord, and are clothed with truth, have no
   connection with such spirits, but keep away from them; but as many as
   are of doubtful minds and frequently repent, betake themselves to
   soothsaying, even as the heathen, and bring greater sin upon themselves
   by their idolatry. For he who inquires of a false prophet in regard to
   any action is an idolater, and devoid of the truth, and foolish. For no
   spirit given by God requires to be asked; but such a spirit having the
   power of Divinity speaks all things of itself, for it proceeds from
   above from the power of the Divine Spirit. But the spirit which is
   asked and speaks according to the desires of men is earthly, [220]
   light, and powerless, and it is altogether silent if it is not
   questioned." "How then, sir," say I, "will a man know which of them is
   the prophet, and which the false prophet?" "I will tell you," says he,
   "about both the prophets, and then you can try the true and the false
   prophet according to my directions. Try the man who has the Divine
   Spirit by his life. First, he who has the Divine Spirit proceeding from
   above is meek, and peaceable, and humble, and refrains from all
   iniquity and the vain desire of this world, and contents himself with
   fewer wants than those of other men, and when asked he makes no reply;
   nor does he speak privately, nor when man wishes the spirit to speak
   does the Holy Spirit speak, but it speaks only when God wishes it to
   speak. When, then, a man having the Divine Spirit comes into an
   assembly of righteous men who have faith in the Divine Spirit, and this
   assembly of men offers up prayer to God, then the angel of the
   prophetic Spirit, [221] who is destined for him, fills the man; and the
   man being filled with the Holy Spirit, speaks to the multitude as the
   Lord wishes. Thus, then, will the Spirit of Divinity become manifest.
   Whatever power therefore comes from the Spirit of Divinity belongs to
   the Lord. Hear, then," says he, "in regard to the spirit which is
   earthly, and empty, and powerless, and foolish. First, the man [222]
   who seems to have the Spirit exalts himself, and wishes to have the
   first seat, and is bold, and impudent, and talkative, and lives in the
   midst of many luxuries and many other delusions, and takes rewards for
   his prophecy; and if he does not receive rewards, he does not prophesy.
   Can, then, the Divine Spirit take rewards and prophesy? It is not
   possible that the prophet of God should do this, but prophets of this
   character are possessed by an earthly spirit. Then it never approaches
   an assembly of righteous men, but shuns them. And it associates with
   doubters and the vain, and prophesies to them in a corner, and deceives
   them, speaking to them, according to their desires, mere empty words:
   for they are empty to whom it gives its answers. For the empty vessel,
   when placed along with the empty, is not crushed, but they correspond
   to each other. When, therefore, it comes into an assembly of righteous
   men who have a Spirit of Divinity, and they offer up prayer, that man
   is made empty, and the earthly spirit flees from him through fear, and
   that man is made dumb, and is entirely crushed, being unable to speak.
   For if you pack closely a storehouse with wine or oil, and put an empty
   jar in the midst of the vessels of wine or oil, you will find that jar
   empty as when you placed it, if you should wish to clear the
   storehouse. So also the empty prophets, when they come to the spirits
   of the righteous, are found [on leaving] to be such as they were when
   they came. This, then, is the mode of life of both prophets. Try by his
   deeds and his life the man who says that he is inspired. But as for
   you, trust the Spirit which comes from God, and has power; but the
   spirit which is earthly and empty trust not at all, for there is no
   power in it: it comes from the devil. Hear, then, the parable which I
   am to tell you. Take a stone, and throw it to the sky, and see if you
   can touch it. Or again, take a squirt of water and squirt into the sky,
   and see if you can penetrate the sky." "How, sir," say I, "can these
   things take place? for both of them are impossible." "As these things,"
   says he, "are impossible, so also are the earthly spirits powerless and
   pithless. But look, on the other hand, at the power which comes from
   above. Hail is of the size of a very small grain, yet when it falls on
   a man's head how much annoyance it gives him! Or, again, take the drop
   which falls from a pitcher to the ground, and yet it hollows a stone.
   [223] You see, then, that the smallest things coming from above have
   great power when they fall upon the earth. [224] Thus also is the
   Divine Spirit, which comes from above, powerful. Trust, then, that
   Spirit, but have nothing to do with the other."
     

   [219] Is ... God. He who sits in the chair is a terrestrial
   spirit.--Vat. And then follows the dislocation of sentences noticed
   above.

   [220] The spirit of all men is earthly, etc. This passage, down to "it
   is not possible that the prophet of God should do this," is found in
   the Vat. and other mss. of the common translation, with the exception
   of the Lambeth, in Command Twelfth. [Consult Wake upon omissions and
   transpositions in this and the former Commandment. And note,
   especially, his valuable caution against confounding what is here said,
   so confusedly, of the Spirit in man, and of the Spirit of God in his
   essence (1 Cor. ii. 11, 12).

   [221] Angel of the prophetic Spirit. The holy messenger (angel) of
   Divinity.--Vat. [1 Cor. xiv. passim.]

   [222] [Here is a caution against divers Phrygian prophesyings.]

   [223] [This proverb is found in many languages. Hermas may have been
   familiar with Ovid, or with the Greek of the poetaster Choerilus, from
   whom Ovid, with other Latin poets, condescended to borrow it.]

   [224] Earth. After this the Vatican reads: Join yourself, therefore, to
   that which has power, and withdraw from that one which is empty.
   [Hermas seems to apply to the Spirit, in carrying out his figure, those
   words of the Psalmist, lxxii. 6.]
     

    Commandment Twelfth.

      On the Twofold Desire. The Commandments of God Can Be Kept, and Believers
      Ought Not to Fear the Devil.

      Chap. I.

   He says to me, "Put away from you all wicked desire, and clothe
   yourself with good and chaste desire; for clothed with this desire you
   will hate wicked desire, [225] and will rein yourself in even as you
   wish. For wicked desire is wild, and is with difficulty tamed. For it
   is terrible, and consumes men exceedingly by its wildness. Especially
   is the servant of God terribly consumed by it, if he falls into it and
   is devoid of understanding. Moreover, it consumes all such as have not
   on them the garment of good desire, but are entangled and mixed up with
   this world. These it delivers up to death." "What then, sir," say I,
   "are the deeds of wicked desire which deliver men over to death? Make
   them known to me, and I will refrain from them." "Listen, then, to the
   works in which evil desire slays the servants of God." [226]

      Chap. II.

   "Foremost of all is the desire after another's wife or husband, and
   after extravagance, and many useless dainties and drinks, and many
   other foolish luxuries; for all luxury is foolish and empty in the
   servants of God. These, then, are the evil desires which slay the
   servants of God. For this evil desire is the daughter of the devil. You
   must refrain from evil desires, that by refraining ye may live to God.
   [227] But as many as are mastered by them, and do not resist them, will
   perish at last, for these desires are fatal. Put you on, then, the
   desire of righteousness; and arming yourself with the fear of the Lord,
   resist them. For the fear of the Lord dwells in good desire. But if
   evil desire see you armed with the fear of God, [228] and resisting it,
   it will flee far from you, and it will no longer appear to you, for it
   fears your armour. Go, then, garlanded with the crown which you have
   gained for victory over it, to the desire of righteousness, and,
   delivering up to it the prize which you have received, serve it even as
   it wishes. [229] If you serve good desire, and be subject to it, you
   will gain the mastery over evil desire, and make it subject to you even
   as you wish." [230]

      Chap. III.

   "I should like to know," say I, "in what way I ought to serve good
   desire." "Hear," says he: "You will practice righteousness and virtue,
   truth and the fear of the Lord, faith and meekness, and whatsoever
   excellences are like to these. Practising these, you will be a
   well-pleasing servant of God, [231] and you will live to Him; and every
   one who shall serve good desire, shall live to God."

   He concluded the twelve commandments, and said to me, "You have now
   these commandments. Walk in them, and exhort your hearers that their
   repentance may be pure during the remainder of their life. Fulfil
   carefully this ministry which I now entrust to you, and you will
   accomplish much. [232] For you will find favour among those who are to
   repent, and they will give heed to your words; for I will be with you,
   and will compel them to obey you." I say to him, "Sir, these
   commandments are great, and good, and glorious, and fitted to gladden
   the heart of the man who can perform them. But I do not know if these
   commandments can be kept by man, because they are exceeding hard." He
   answered and said to me, "If you lay it down as certain that they can
   be kept, [233] then you will easily keep them, and they will not be
   hard. But if you come to imagine that they cannot be kept by man, then
   you will not keep them. Now I say to you, If you do not keep them, but
   neglect them, you will not be saved, nor your children, nor your house,
   since you have already determined for yourself that these commandments
   cannot be kept by man."

      Chap. IV.

   These things he said to me in tones of the deepest anger, so that I was
   confounded and exceedingly afraid of him, for his figure was altered so
   that a man could not endure his anger. But seeing me altogether
   agitated and confused, he began to speak to me in more gentle tones;
   and he said: "O fool, senseless and doubting, do you not perceive how
   great is the glory of God, and how strong and marvellous, in that He
   created the world for the sake of man, [234] and subjected all creation
   to him, and gave him power to rule over everything under heaven? If,
   then, man is lord of the creatures of God, and rules over all, is he
   not able to be lord also of these commandments? For," says he, "the man
   who has the Lord in his heart can also be lord of all, and of every one
   of these commandments. But to those who have the Lord only on their
   lips, [235] but their hearts hardened, [236] and who are far from the
   Lord, the commandments are hard and difficult. Put, therefore, ye who
   are empty and fickle in your faith, the Lord in your heart, and ye will
   know that there is nothing easier or sweeter, or more manageable, than
   these commandments. Return, ye who walk in the commandments of the
   devil, in hard, and bitter, and wild licentiousness, and fear not the
   devil; for there is no power in him against you, for I will be with
   you, the angel of repentance, who am lord over him. The devil has fear
   only, but his fear has no strength. [237] Fear him not, then, and he
   will flee from you."

      Chap. V.

   I say to him, "Sir, listen to me for a moment." "Say what you wish,"
   says he. "Man, sir," say I, "is eager to keep the commandments of God,
   and there is no one who does not ask of the Lord that strength may be
   given him for these commandments, and that he may be subject to them;
   but the devil is hard, and holds sway over them." "He cannot," says he,
   "hold sway over the servants of God, who with all their heart place
   their hopes in Him. The devil can wrestle against these, overthrow them
   he cannot. If, then, ye resist him, he will be conquered, and flee in
   disgrace from you. As many, therefore," says he, "as are empty, fear
   the devil, as possessing power. When a man has filled very suitable
   jars with good wine, and a few among those jars are left empty, [238]
   then he comes to the jars, and does not look at the full jars, for he
   knows that they are full; but he looks at the empty, being afraid lest
   they have become sour. For empty jars quickly become sour, and the
   goodness of the wine is gone. So also the devil goes to all the
   servants of God to try them. As many, then, as are full in the faith,
   resist him strongly, and he withdraws from them, having no way by which
   he might enter them. He goes, then, to the empty, and finding a way of
   entrance, into them, he produces in them whatever he wishes, and they
   become his servants." [239]

      Chap. VI.

   "But I, the angel of repentance, say to you, Fear not the devil; for I
   was sent," says he, "to be with you who repent with all your heart, and
   to make you strong in faith. Trust God, [240] then, ye who on account
   of your sins have despaired of life, and who add to your sins and weigh
   down your life; for if ye return to the Lord with all your heart, and
   practice righteousness the rest of your days, [241] and serve Him
   according to His will, He will heal your former sins, and you will have
   power to hold sway over the works of the devil. But as to the threats
   of the devil, fear them not at all, for he is powerless as the sinews
   of a dead man. Give ear to me, then, and fear Him who has all power,
   both to save and destroy, [242] and keep His commandments, and ye will
   live to God." I say to him, "Sir, I am now made strong in all the
   ordinances of the Lord, because you are with me; and I know that you
   will crush all the power of the devil, and we shall have rule over him,
   and shall prevail against all his works. And I hope, sir, to be able to
   keep all these commandments [243] which you have enjoined upon me, the
   Lord strengthening me." "You will keep them," says he, "if your heart
   be pure towards the Lord; and all will keep them who cleanse their
   hearts from the vain desires of this world, and they will live to God."
     

   [225] [Concupiscence is here shown to have the nature of sin.]

   [226] [See the Greek of Athanasius, and Grabe's transposition, in
   Wake's version of the Eleventh and Twelfth Commandments.]

   [227] For ... God. This desire, therefore, is wicked and destructive,
   bringing death on the servants of God. Whoever, therefore, shall
   abstain from evil desire, shall live to God.--Vat.

   [228] God. The Lord.--Vat.

   [229] Go ... wishes. And you will obtain the victory, and will be
   crowned on account of it, and you will arrive at good desire, and you
   will deliver up the victory which you have obtained to God, and you
   will serve Him by acting even as you yourself wish to act.--Vat.

   [230] Chapters third, fourth, and a part of fifth, are omitted in the
   Palatine. [This chapter seems based on Heb. v. 14.]

   [231] God. The Lord.--Vat.

   [232] [Here is the commission to be a prophet, and to speak
   prophesyings in the congregation. If the Montanists resisted these
   teachings, they were self-condemned. Such is the idea here conveyed. 1
   Cor. xiv. 32, 37.]

   [233] If ... kept, omitted in Vat.

   [234] [Boyle beautifully reconciles "those two current assertions, that
   (1) God made all things for His own glory, and that (2) He made all
   things for man." See Usefulness of Nat. Philos., part i., essay 3, or
   Leighton's Works, vol. iii. p. 235, London, 1870.]

   [235] Isa. xxix. 13; Matt. xv. 8.

   [236] John xii. 40; 2 Cor. iii. 14.

   [237] [Jas. ii. 19, iv. 6, 7.]

   [238] Empty. Half full.--Vat.

   [239] [Eph. iv. 27.]

   [240] Trust God. Believe ye, then, who on account of your sins have
   forgotten God.--Vat.

   [241] Practise ... days, omitted in Vat.

   [242] Matt. x. 28; Luke xii. 5.

   [243] Rule over ... commandments. But we shall conquer him completely,
   if we can keep these commandments.--Vat.