The Instructor.

  Book III.
     
     

      Chapter I.--On the True Beauty.

   It is then, as appears, the greatest of all lessons to know one's self.
   For if one knows himself, he will know God; and knowing God, he will be
   made like God, not by wearing gold or long robes, but by well-doing,
   and by requiring as few things as possible. [1574]

   Now, God alone is in need of nothing, and rejoices most when He sees us
   bright with the ornament of intelligence; and then, too, rejoices in
   him who is arrayed in chastity, the sacred stole of the body. Since
   then the soul consists of three divisions; [1575] the intellect, which
   is called the reasoning faculty, is the inner man, which is the ruler
   of this man that is seen. And that one, in another respect, God guides.
   But the irascible part, being brutal, dwells near to insanity. And
   appetite, which is the third department, is many-shaped above Proteus,
   the varying sea-god, who changed himself now into one shape, now into
   another; and it allures to adulteries, to licentiousness, to
   seductions.


   "At first he was a lion with ample beard." [1576]

   While he yet retained the ornament, the hair of the chin showed him to
   be a man.


   "But after that a serpent, a pard, or a big sow."

   Love of ornament has degenerated to wantonness. A man no longer appears
   like a strong wild beast,


   "But he became moist water, and a tree of lofty branches."

   Passions break out, pleasures overflow; beauty fades, and falls quicker
   than the leaf on the ground, when the amorous storms of lust blow on it
   before the coming of autumn, and is withered by destruction. For lust
   becomes and fabricates all things, and wishes to cheat, so as to
   conceal the man. But that man with whom the Word dwells does not alter
   himself, does not get himself up: he has the form which is of the Word;
   he is made like to God; he is beautiful; he does not ornament himself:
   his is beauty, the true beauty, for it is God; and that man becomes
   God, since God so wills. Heraclitus, then, rightly said, "Men are gods,
   and gods are men." For the Word Himself is the manifest mystery: God in
   man, and man God. And the Mediator executes the Father's will; for the
   Mediator is the Word, who is common to both--the Son of God, the
   Saviour of men; His Servant, our Teacher. And the flesh being a slave,
   as Paul testifies, how can one with any reason adorn the handmaid like
   a pimp? For that which is of flesh has the form of a servant. Paul
   says, speaking of the Lord, "Because He emptied Himself, taking the
   form of a servant," [1577] calling the outward man servant, previous to
   the Lord becoming a servant and wearing flesh. But the compassionate
   God Himself set the flesh free, and releasing it from destruction, and
   from bitter and deadly bondage, endowed it with incorruptibility,
   arraying the flesh in this, the holy embellishment of
   eternity--immortality.

   There is, too, another beauty of men--love. "And love," according to
   the apostle, "suffers long, and is kind; envieth not; vaunteth not
   itself, is not puffed up." [1578] For the decking of one's self
   out--carrying, as it does, the look of superfluity and uselessness--is
   vaunting one's self. Wherefore he adds, "doth not behave itself
   unseemly:" for a figure which is not one's own, and is against nature,
   is unseemly; but what is artificial is not one's own, as is clearly
   explained: "seeketh not," it is said, "what is not her own." For truth
   calls that its own which belongs to it; but the love of finery seeks
   what is not its own, being apart from God, and the Word, from love.

   And that the Lord Himself was uncomely in aspect, the Spirit testifies
   by Esaias: "And we saw Him, and He had no form nor comeliness but His
   form was mean, inferior to men." [1579] Yet who was more admirable than
   the Lord? But it was not the beauty of the flesh visible to the eye,
   but the true beauty of both soul and body, which He exhibited, which in
   the former is beneficence; in the latter--that is, the
   flesh--immortality.
     

   [1574] [On this book, Kaye's comments extend from p. 91 to p. 111 of
   his analysis.]

   [1575] [Note this psychological dissection. Compare Aristotle,
   Nicomachean Ethics, book vi. cap. 2, aisthesis, nous, orexis, sense,
   intellect, appetition. Also, book i. cap. 11, or 13 in some editions.]

   [1576] Odyss., iv. 456-458.

   [1577] Phil. ii. 7.

   [1578] 1 Cor. xiii. 4.

   [1579] Isa. liii. 2, 3. [But see also Ps. xlv. 2, which was often cited
   by the ancients to prove the reverse. Both may be reconciled; he was a
   fair and comely child like his father David; but, as "the man of
   sorrows," he became old in looks, and his countence was marred. For
   David's beauty, see 1 Sam. xvi. 12. For our Lord's at twelve years of
   age, when the virgin was seeking her child, Canticles, v. 7-16. For his
   appearance at three and thirty, when the Jews only ventured to credit
   him with less than fifty years, John viii. 57. See also Irenaeus,
   Against Heresies, cap. xxii. note 12, p. 391, this series.]
     

      Chapter II.--Against Embellishing the Body.

   It is not, then, the aspect of the outward man, but the soul that is to
   be decorated with the ornament of goodness; we may say also the flesh
   with the adornment of temperance. But those women who beautify the
   outside, are unawares all waste in the inner depths, as is the case
   with the ornaments of the Egyptians; among whom temples with their
   porticos and vestibules are carefully constructed, and groves and
   sacred fields adjoining; the halls are surrounded with many pillars;
   and the walls gleam with foreign stones, and there is no want of
   artistic painting; and the temples gleam with gold, and silver, and
   amber, and glitter with parti-coloured gems from India and Ethiopia;
   and the shrines are veiled with gold-embroidered hangings.

   But if you enter the penetralia of the enclosure, and, in haste to
   behold something better, seek the image that is the inhabitant of the
   temple, and if any priest of those that offer sacrifice there, looking
   grave, and singing a paean in the Egyptian tongue, remove a little of
   the veil to show the god, he will give you a hearty laugh at the object
   of worship. For the deity that is sought, to whom you have rushed, will
   not be found within, but a cat, or a crocodile, or a serpent of the
   country, or some such beast unworthy of the temple, but quite worthy of
   a den, a hole, or the dirt. The god of the Egyptians appears a beast
   rolling on a purple couch.

   So those women who wear gold, occupying themselves in curling at their
   locks, and engaged in anointing their cheeks, painting their eyes, and
   dyeing their hair, and practising the other pernicious arts of luxury,
   decking the covering of flesh,--in truth, imitate the Egyptians, in
   order to attract their infatuated lovers.

   But if one withdraw the veil of the temple, I mean the head-dress, the
   dye, the clothes, the gold, the paint, the cosmetics,--that is, the web
   consisting of them, the veil, with the view of finding within the true
   beauty, he will be disgusted, I know well. For he will not find the
   image of God dwelling within, as is meet; but instead of it a
   fornicator and adulteress has occupied the shrine of the soul. And the
   true beast will thus be detected--an ape smeared with white paint. And
   that deceitful serpent, devouring the understanding part of man through
   vanity, has the soul as its hole, filling all with deadly poisons; and
   injecting his own venom of deception, this pander of a dragon has
   changed women into harlots. For love of display is not for a lady, but
   a courtesan. Such women care little for keeping at home with their
   husbands; but loosing their husbands' purse-strings, they spend its
   supplies on their lusts, that they may have many witnesses of their
   seemingly fair appearance; and, devoting the whole day to their toilet,
   they spend their time with their bought slaves. Accordingly they season
   the flesh like a pernicious sauce; and the day they bestow on the
   toilet shut up in their rooms, so as not to be caught decking
   themselves. But in the evening this spurious beauty creeps out to
   candle-light as out of a hole; for drunkenness and the dimness of the
   light aid what they have put on. The woman who dyes her hair yellow,
   Menander the comic poet expels from the house:--


   "Now get out of this house, for no chaste

   Woman ought to make her hair yellow,"

   nor, I would add, stain her cheeks, nor paint her eyes. Unawares the
   poor wretches destroy their own beauty, by the introduction of what is
   spurious. At the dawn of day, mangling, racking, and plastering
   themselves over with certain compositions, they chill the skin, furrow
   the flesh with poisons, and with curiously prepared washes, thus
   blighting their own beauty. Wherefore they are seen to be yellow from
   the use of cosmetics, and susceptible to disease, their flesh, which
   has been shaded with poisons, being now in a melting state. So they
   dishonour the Creator of men, as if the beauty given by Him were
   nothing worth. As you might expect, they become lazy in housekeeping,
   sitting like painted things to be looked at, not as if made for
   domestic economy. Wherefore in the comic poet the sensible woman says,
   "What can we women do wise or brilliant, who sit with hair dyed yellow,
   outraging the character of gentlewomen; causing the overthrow of
   houses, the ruin of nuptials, and accusations on the part of children?"
   [1580] In the same way, Antiphanes the comic poet, in Malthaca,
   ridicules the meretriciousness of women in words that apply to them
   all, and are framed against the rubbing of themselves with cosmetics,
   saying:--


   "She comes,

   She goes back, she approaches, she goes back.

   She has come, she is here, she washes herself, she advances,

   She is soaped, she is combed, she goes out, is rubbed,

   She washes herself, looks in the glass, robes herself,

   Anoints herself, decks herself, besmears herself;

   And if aught is wrong, chokes [with vexation]."

   Thrice, I say, not once, do they deserve to perish, who use crocodiles'
   excrement, and anoint themselves with the froth of putrid humours, and
   stain their eyebrows with soot, and rub their cheeks with white lead.

   These, then, who are disgusting even to the heathen poets for their
   fashions, how shall they not be rejected by the truth? [1581]
   Accordingly another comic poet, Alexis, reproves them. For I shall
   adduce his words, which with extravagance of statement shame the
   obstinacy of their impudence. For he was not very far beyond the mark.
   And I cannot for shame come to the assistance of women held up to such
   ridicule in comedy.

   Then she ruins her husband.


   "For first, in comparison with gain and the spoiling of neighbours,

   All else is in their eyes superfluous."

   "Is one of them little? She stitches cork into her shoe-sole.

   Is one tall? She wears a thin sole,

   And goes out keeping her head down on her shoulder:

   This takes away from her height. Has one no flanks?

   She has something sewed on to her, so that the spectators

   May exclaim on her fine shape behind. Has she a prominent stomach?

   By making additions, to render it straight, such as the nurses we see
   in the comic poets,

   She draws back, as it were, by these poles, the protuberance of the
   stomach in front.

   Has one yellow eyebrows? She stains them with soot.

   Do they happen to be black? She smears them with ceruse.

   Is one very white-skinned? She rouges.

   Has one any part of the body beautiful? She shows it bare.

   Has she beautiful teeth? She must needs laugh,

   That those present may see what a pretty mouth she has;

   But if not in the humour for laughing, she passes the day within,

   With a slender sprig of myrtle between her lips,

   Like what cooks have always at hand when they have goats' heads to
   sell,

   So that she must keep them apart the whilst, whether she will or not."

   I set these quotations from the comic poets [1582] before you, since
   the Word most strenuously wishes to save us. And by and by I will
   fortify them with the divine Scriptures. For he who does not escape
   notice is wont to abstain from sins, on account of the shame of
   reproof. Just as the plastered hand and the anointed eye exhibit from
   their very look the suspicion of a person in illness, so also cosmetics
   and dyes indicate that the soul is deeply diseased.

   The divine Instructor enjoins us not to approach to another's river,
   meaning by the figurative expression "another's river," "another's
   wife;" the wanton that flows to all, and out of licentiousness gives
   herself up to meretricious enjoyment with all. "Abstain from water that
   is another's," He says, "and drink not of another's well," admonishing
   us to shun the stream of "voluptuousness," that we may live long, and
   that years of life may be added to us; [1583] both by not hunting after
   pleasure that belongs to another, and by diverting our inclinations.

   Love of dainties and love of wine, though great vices, are not of such
   magnitude as fondness for finery. [1584] "A full table and repeated
   cups" are enough to satisfy greed. But to those who are fond of gold,
   and purple, and jewels, neither the gold that is above the earth and
   below it is sufficient, nor the Tyrian Sea, nor the freight that comes
   from India and Ethiopia, nor yet Pactolus flowing with gold; not even
   were a man to become a Midas would he be satisfied, but would be still
   poor, craving other wealth. Such people are ready to die with their
   gold.

   And if Plutus [1585] is blind, are not those women that are crazy about
   him, and have a fellow-feeling with him, blind too? Having, then, no
   limit to their lust, they push on to shamelessness. For the theatre,
   and pageants, and many spectators, and strolling in the temples, and
   loitering in the streets, that they may be seen conspicuously by all,
   are necessary to them. For those that glory in their looks, not in
   heart, [1586] dress to please others. For as the brand shows the slave,
   so do gaudy colours the adulteress. "For though thou clothe thyself in
   scarlet, and deck thyself with ornaments of gold, and anoint thine eyes
   with stibium, in vain is thy beauty," [1587] says the Word by Jeremiah.
   Is it not monstrous, that while horses, birds, and the rest of the
   animals, spring and bound from the grass and meadows, rejoicing in
   ornament that is their own, in mane, and natural colour, and varied
   plumage; woman, as if inferior to the brute creation, should think
   herself so unlovely as to need foreign, and bought, and painted beauty?

   Head-dresses and varieties of head-dresses, and elaborate braidings,
   and infinite modes of dressing the hair, and costly specimens of
   mirrors, in which they arrange their costume,--hunting after those
   that, like silly children, are crazy about their figures,--are
   characteristic of women who have lost all sense of shame. If any one
   were to call these courtesans, he would make no mistake, for they turn
   their faces into masks. But us the Word enjoins "to look not on the
   things that are seen, but the things that are not seen; for the things
   that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen are
   eternal." [1588]

   But what passes beyond the bounds of absurdity, is that they have
   invented mirrors for this artificial shape of theirs, as if it were
   some excellent work or masterpiece. The deception rather requires a
   veil thrown over it. For as the Greek fable has it, it was not a
   fortunate thing for the beautiful Narcissus to have been the beholder
   of his own image. And if Moses commanded men to make not an image to
   represent God by art, how can these women be right, who by their own
   reflection produce an imitation of their own likeness, in order to the
   falsifying of their faces? Likewise also, when Samuel the prophet was
   sent to anoint one of the sons of Jesse for king, and on seeing the
   eldest of his sons to be fair and tall, produced the anointing oil,
   being delighted with him, the Lord said to him, "Look not to his
   appearance, nor the height of his stature: for I have rejected him. For
   man looketh on the eyes, but the Lord into the heart." [1589]

   And he anointed not him that was comely in person, but him that was
   comely in soul. If, then, the Lord counts the natural beauty of the
   body inferior to that of the soul, what thinks He of spurious beauty,
   rejecting utterly as He does all falsehood? "For we walk by faith, not
   by sight." [1590] Very clearly the Lord accordingly teaches by Abraham,
   that he who follows God must despise country, and relations, and
   possessions, and all wealth, by making him a stranger. And therefore
   also He called him His friend who had despised the substance which he
   had possessed at home. For he was of good parentage, and very opulent;
   and so with three hundred and eighteen servants of his own he subdued
   the four kings who had taken Lot captive.

   Esther alone we find justly adorned. The spouse adorned herself
   mystically for her royal husband; but her beauty turns out the
   redemption price of a people that were about to be massacred. And that
   decoration makes women courtesans, and men effeminate and adulterers,
   the tragic poet is a witness; thus discoursing:--


   "He that judged the goddesses,

   As the myth of the Argives has it, having come from Phrygia

   To Lacedaemon, arrayed in flowery vestments,

   Glittering with gold and barbaric luxury,

   Loving, departed, carrying away her he loved,

   Helen, to the folds of Ida, having found that

   Menelaus was away from home." [1591]

   O adulterous beauty! Barbarian finery and effeminate luxury overthrew
   Greece; Lacedaemonian chastity was corrupted by clothes, and luxury, and
   graceful beauty; barbaric display proved Jove's daughter a courtesan.

   They had no instructor [1592] to restrain their lusts, nor one to say,
   "Do not commit adultery;" nor, "Lust not;" or, "Travel not by lust into
   adultery;" or further, "Influence not thy passions by desire of
   adornment."

   What an end was it that ensued to them, and what woes they endured, who
   would not restrain their self-will! Two continents were convulsed by
   unrestrained pleasures, and all was thrown into confusion by a
   barbarian boy. The whole of Hellas puts to sea; the ocean is burdened
   with the weight of continents; a protracted war breaks out, and fierce
   battles are waged, and the plains are crowded with dead: the barbarian
   assails the fleet with outrage; wickedness prevails, and the eye of
   that poetic Jove looks on the Thracians:--


   "The barbarian plains drink noble blood,

   And the streams of the rivers are choked with dead bodies."

   Breasts are beaten in lamentations, and grief desolates the land; and
   all the feet, and the summits of many-fountained Ida, and the cities of
   the Trojans, and the ships of the Achaeans, shake.

   Where, O Homer, shall we flee and stand? Show us a spot of ground that
   is not shaken!--


   "Touch not the reins, inexperienced boy,

   Nor mount the seat, not having learned to drive." [1593]

   Heaven delights in two charioteers, by whom alone the chariot of fire
   is guided. For the mind is carried away by pleasure; and the unsullied
   principle of reason, when not instructed by the Word, slides down into
   licentiousness, and gets a fall as the due reward of its transgression.
   An example of this are the angels, who renounced the beauty of God for
   a beauty which fades, and so fell from heaven to earth. [1594]

   The Shechemites, too, were punished by an overthrow for dishonouring
   the holy virgin. The grave was their punishment, and the monument of
   their ignominy leads to salvation.
     

   [1580] Aristophanes, Lysistrata.

   [1581] [John xvii. 17. "Thy word is truth," is here in mind; and, soon
   after, he speaks of the Scriptures and the Word (Logos) in the same
   way.]

   [1582] [He rebukes heathen women out of their own poets; while he warns
   Christian women also to resist the contagion of their example,
   fortified by the Scriptures.]

   [1583] Prov. ix. 11.

   [1584] [This is worth noting. Worse than love of wine, because he
   regards a love for finery as tending to loss of chastity.]

   [1585] Wealth.

   [1586] 1 Thess. ii. 17.

   [1587] Jer. iv. 30.

   [1588] 2 Cor. iv. 18.

   [1589] 1 Sam. xvi. 7.

   [1590] 2 Cor. v. 7.

   [1591] Iphigenia in Aulis, 71-77.

   [1592] [The law was the paedagogue of the Jews (Gal. iii. 24); and
   therefore, as to Gentiles, they were a law unto themselves (Rom. ii.
   14, 15), with some truth in their philosophy to guide them.]

   [1593] Phaethon of Euripides.

   [1594] Gen. vi. 1, 2. [It is surprising with what tenacity this
   interpretation clings to the ancient mind of the Church. The Nephilim
   and Gibborim need a special investigation. The Oriental tales of the
   genii are probably connected with their fabulous history.]
     

      Chapter III.--Against Men Who Embellish Themselves.

   To such an extent, then, has luxury advanced, that not only are the
   female sex deranged about this frivolous pursuit, but men also are
   infected with the disease. [1595] For not being free of the love of
   finery, they are not in health; but inclining to voluptuousness, they
   become effeminate, cutting their hair in an ungentlemanlike and
   meretricious way, clothed in fine and transparent garments, chewing
   mastich, [1596] smelling of perfume. [1597] What can one say on seeing
   them? Like one who judges people by their foreheads, he will divine
   them to be adulterers and effeminate, addicted to both kinds of venery,
   haters of hair, destitute of hair, detesting the bloom of manliness,
   and adorning their locks like women. "Living for unholy acts of
   audacity, these fickle wretches do reckless and nefarious deeds," says
   the Sibyl. For their service the towns are full of those who take out
   hair by pitch-plasters, shave, and pluck out hairs from these womanish
   creatures. And shops are erected and opened everywhere; and adepts at
   this meretricious fornication make a deal of money openly by those who
   plaster themselves, and give their hair to be pulled out in all ways by
   those who make it their trade, feeling no shame before the onlookers or
   those who approach, nor before themselves, being men. Such are those
   addicted to base passions, whose whole body is made smooth by the
   violent tuggings of pitch-plasters. It is utterly impossible to get
   beyond such effrontery. If nothing is left undone by them, neither
   shall anything be left unspoken by me. Diogenes, when he was being
   sold, chiding like a teacher one of these degenerate creatures, said
   very manfully, "Come, youngster, buy for yourself a man," chastising
   his meretriciousness by an ambiguous speech. But for those who are men
   to shave and smooth themselves, how ignoble! As for dyeing of hair, and
   anointing of grey locks, and dyeing them yellow, these are practices of
   abandoned effeminates; and their feminine combing of themselves is a
   thing to be let alone. For they think, that like serpents they divest
   themselves of the old age of their head by painting and renovating
   themselves. But though they do doctor the hair cleverly, they will not
   escape wrinkles, nor will they elude death by tricking time. For it is
   not dreadful, it is not dreadful to appear old, when you are not able
   to shut your eyes to the fact that you are so.

   The more, then, a man hastes to the end, the more truly venerable is
   he, having God alone as his senior, since He is the eternal aged One,
   He who is older than all things. Prophecy has called him the "Ancient
   of days; and the hair of His head was as pure wool," says the prophet.
   [1598] "And none other," says the Lord, "can make the hair white or
   black." [1599] How, then, do these godless ones work in rivalry with
   God, or rather violently oppose Him, when they transmute the hair made
   white by Him? "The crown of old men is great experience," [1600] says
   Scripture; and the hoary hair of their countenance is the blossom of
   large experience. But these dishonour the reverence of age, the head
   covered with grey hairs. It is not, it is not possible for him to show
   the head true who has a fraudulent head. "But ye have not so learned
   Christ; if so be that ye have heard Him, and have been taught by Him,
   as the truth is in Jesus: that ye put off, concerning the former
   conversation, the old man (not the hoary man, but him that is) corrupt
   according to deceitful lusts; and be renewed (not by dyeings and
   ornaments), but in the spirit of your mind; and put on the new man,
   which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness." [1601]

   But for one who is a man to comb himself and shave himself with a
   razor, for the sake of fine effect, to arrange his hair at the
   looking-glass, to shave his cheeks, pluck hairs out of them, and smooth
   them, how womanly! And, in truth, unless you saw them naked, you would
   suppose them to be women. For although not allowed to wear gold, yet
   out of effeminate desire they enwreath their latches and fringes with
   leaves of gold; or, getting certain spherical figures of the same metal
   made, they fasten them to their ankles, and hang them from their necks.
   This is a device of enervated men, who are dragged to the women's
   apartments, amphibious and lecherous beasts. For this is a meretricious
   and impious form of snare. For God wished women to be smooth, and
   rejoice in their locks alone growing spontaneously, as a horse in his
   mane; but has adorned man, like the lions, with a beard, and endowed
   him, as an attribute of manhood, with shaggy breasts,--a sign this of
   strength and rule. So also cocks, which fight in defence of the hens,
   he has decked with combs, as it were helmets; and so high a value does
   God set on these locks, that He orders them to make their appearance on
   men simultaneously with discretion, and delighted with a venerable
   look, has honoured gravity of countenance with grey hairs. But wisdom,
   and discriminating judgments that are hoary with wisdom, attain
   maturity with time, and by the vigour of long experience give strength
   to old age, producing grey hairs, the admirable flower of venerable
   wisdom, conciliating confidence. This, then, the mark of the man, the
   beard, by which he is seen to be a man, is older than Eve, and is the
   token of the superior nature. In this God deemed it right that he
   should excel, and dispersed hair over man's whole body. Whatever
   smoothness and softness was in him He abstracted from his side when He
   formed the woman Eve, physically receptive, his partner in parentage,
   his help in household management, while he (for he had parted with all
   smoothness) remained a man, and shows himself man. And to him has been
   assigned action, as to her suffering; for what is shaggy is drier and
   warmer than what is smooth. Wherefore males have both more hair and
   more heat than females, animals that are entire than the emasculated,
   perfect than imperfect. It is therefore impious to desecrate the symbol
   of manhood, hairiness. [1602] But the embellishment of smoothing (for I
   am warned by the Word), if it is to attract men, is the act of an
   effeminate person,--if to attract women, is the act of an adulterer;
   and both must be driven as far as possible from our society. "But the
   very hairs of your head are all numbered," says the Lord; [1603] those
   on the chin, too, are numbered, and those on the whole body. There must
   be therefore no plucking out, contrary to God's appointment, which has
   counted [1604] them in according to His will. "Know ye not yourselves,"
   says the apostle, "that Christ Jesus is in you?" [1605] Whom, had we
   known as dwelling in us, I know not how we could have dared to
   dishonour. But the using of pitch to pluck out hair (I shrink from even
   mentioning the shamelessness connected with this process), and in the
   act of bending back and bending down, the violence done to nature's
   modesty by stepping out and bending backwards in shameful postures, yet
   the doers not ashamed of themselves, but conducting themselves without
   shame in the midst of the youth, and in the gymnasium, where the
   prowess of man is tried; the following of this unnatural practice, is
   it not the extreme of licentiousness? For those who engage in such
   practices in public will scarcely behave with modesty to any at home.
   Their want of shame in public attests their unbridled licentiousness in
   private. [1606] For he who in the light of day denies his manhood, will
   prove himself manifestly a woman by night. "There shall not be," said
   the Word by Moses, "a harlot of the daughters of Israel; there shall
   not be a fornicator of the sons of Israel." [1607]

   But the pitch does good, it is said. Nay, it defames, say I. No one who
   entertains right sentiments would wish to appear a fornicator, were he
   not the victim of that vice, and study to defame the beauty of his
   form. No one would, I say, voluntarily choose to do this. "For if God
   foreknew those who are called, according to His purpose, to be
   conformed to the image of His Son," for whose sake, according to the
   blessed apostle, He has appointed "Him to be the first-born among many
   brethren," [1608] are they not godless who treat with indignity the
   body which is of like form with the Lord?

   The man, who would be beautiful, must adorn that which is the most
   beautiful thing in man, his mind, which every day he ought to exhibit
   in greater comeliness; and should pluck out not hairs, but lusts. I
   pity the boys possessed by the slave-dealers, that are decked for
   dishonour. But they are not treated with ignominy by themselves, but by
   command the wretches are adorned for base gain. But how disgusting are
   those who willingly practice the things to which, if compelled, they
   would, if they were men, die rather than do?

   But life has reached this pitch of licentiousness through the
   wantonness of wickedness, and lasciviousness is diffused over the
   cities, having become law. Beside them women stand in the stews,
   offering their own flesh for hire for lewd pleasure, and boys, taught
   to deny their sex, act the part of women.

   Luxury has deranged all things; it has disgraced man. A luxurious
   niceness seeks everything, attempts everything, forces everything,
   coerces nature. Men play the part of women, and women that of men,
   contrary to nature; women are at once wives and husbands: no passage is
   closed against libidinousness; and their promiscuous lechery is a
   public institution, and luxury is domesticated. O miserable spectacle!
   horrible conduct! Such are the trophies of your social licentiousness
   which are exhibited: the evidence of these deeds are the prostitutes.
   Alas for such wickedness! Besides, the wretches know not how many
   tragedies the uncertainty of intercourse produces. For fathers,
   unmindful of children of theirs that have been exposed, often without
   their knowledge, have intercourse with a son that has debauched
   himself, and daughters that are prostitutes; and licence in lust shows
   them to be the men that have begotten them. These things your wise laws
   allow: people may sin legally; and the execrable indulgence in pleasure
   they call a thing indifferent. They who commit adultery against nature
   think themselves free from adultery. Avenging justice follows their
   audacious deeds, and, dragging on themselves inevitable calamity, they
   purchase death for a small sum of money. The miserable dealers in these
   wares sail, bringing a cargo of fornication, like wine or oil; and
   others, far more wretched, traffic in pleasures as they do in bread and
   sauce, not heeding the words of Moses, "Do not prostitute thy daughter,
   to cause her to be a whore, lest the land fall to whoredom, and the
   land become full of wickedness." [1609]

   Such was predicted of old, and the result is notorious: the whole earth
   has now become full of fornication and wickedness. I admire the ancient
   legislators of the Romans: these detested effeminacy of conduct; and
   the giving of the body to feminine purposes, contrary to the law of
   nature, they judged worthy of the extremest penalty, according to the
   righteousness of the law.

   For it is not lawful to pluck out the beard, [1610] man's natural and
   noble ornament.


   "A youth with his first beard: for with this, youth is most graceful."

   By and by he is anointed, delighting in the beard "on which descended"
   the prophetic "ointment" [1611] with which Aaron was honoured.

   And it becomes him who is rightly trained, on whom peace has pitched
   its tent, to preserve peace also with his hair.

   What, then, will not women with strong propensities to lust practice,
   when they look on men perpetrating such enormities? Rather we ought not
   to call such as these men, but lewd wretches (bataloi), and effeminate
   (gunides), whose voices are feeble, and whose clothes are womanish both
   in feel and dye. And such creatures are manifestly shown to be what
   they are from their external appearance, their clothes, shoes, form,
   walk, cut of their hair, look. "For from his look shall a man be
   known," says the Scripture, "from meeting a man the man is known: the
   dress of a man, the step of his foot, the laugh of his teeth, tell
   tales of him." [1612]

   For these, for the most part, plucking out the rest of their hair, only
   dress that on the head, all but binding their locks with fillets like
   women. Lions glory in their shaggy hair, but are armed by their hair in
   the fight; and boars even are made imposing by their mane; the hunters
   are afraid of them when they see them bristling their hair.


   "The fleecy sheep are loaded with their wool." [1613]

   And their wool the loving Father has made abundant for thy use, O man,
   having taught thee to sheer their fleeces. Of the nations, the Celts
   and Scythians wear their hair long, but do not deck themselves. The
   bushy hair of the barbarian has something fearful in it; and its auburn
   (xanthon) colour threatens war, the hue being somewhat akin to blood.
   Both these barbarian races hate luxury. As clear witnesses will be
   produced by the German, the Rhine; [1614] and by the Scythian, the
   waggon. Sometimes the Scythian despises even the waggon: its size seems
   sumptuousness to the barbarian; and leaving its luxurious ease, the
   Scythian man leads a frugal life. For a house sufficient, and less
   encumbered than the waggon, he takes his horse, and mounting it, is
   borne where he wishes. And when faint with hunger, he asks his horse
   for sustenance; and he offers his veins, and supplies his master with
   all he possesses--his blood. To the nomad the horse is at once
   conveyance and sustenance; and the warlike youth of the Arabians (these
   are other nomads) are mounted on camels. They sit on breeding camels;
   and these feed and run at the same time, carrying their masters the
   whilst, and bear the house with them. And if drink fail the barbarians,
   they milk them; and after that their food is spent, they do not spare
   even their blood, as is reported of furious wolves. And these, gentler
   than the barbarians, when injured, bear no remembrance of the wrong,
   but sweep bravely over the desert, carrying and nourishing their
   masters at the same time.

   Perish, then, the savage beasts whose food is blood! For it is unlawful
   for men, whose body is nothing but flesh elaborated of blood, to touch
   blood. For human blood has become a partaker of the Word: [1615] it is
   a participant of grace by the Spirit; and if any one injure him, he
   will not escape unnoticed. Man may, though naked in body, address the
   Lord. But I approve the simplicity of the barbarians: loving an
   unencumbered life, the barbarians have abandoned luxury. Such the Lord
   calls us to be--naked of finery, naked of vanity, wrenched from our
   sins, bearing only the wood of life, aiming only at salvation.
     

   [1595] [Heathen manners are here depicted as a warning to Christians.
   We cannot suppose Christians, as yet, to any extent, corrupted in their
   manners by fashion and frivolity; for to be a Christian excluded one
   from temptations of this kind.]

   [1596] [Query, De re Nicotiana?]

   [1597] [Smelling of Nicotine?]

   [1598] Dan. vii. 9. [A truly eloquent passage.]

   [1599] Matt. v. 36.

   [1600] Ecclus. xxv. 6.

   [1601] Eph. iv. 20-24.

   [1602] [On the other hand, this was Esau's symbol; and the sensual
   "satyrs" (Isa. xiii. 2) are "hairy goats," in the original. So also the
   originals of "devils" in Lev. xvii. 7, and 2 Chron. xi. 15. See the
   learned note of Mr. West, in his edition of Leighton, vol. v. p. 161.]

   [1603] Matt. x. 30.

   [1604] enkatarithmenen seems to be here used in a middle, not a passive
   sense, as katarithmemenos is sometimes.

   [1605] 2 Cor. xiii. 5.

   [1606] [Such were the manners with which the Gospel was forced
   everywhere to contend. That they were against nature is sufficiently
   clear from the remains of decency in some heathen. Herodotus (book i.
   cap. 8) tells us that the Lydians counted it disgraceful even for a man
   to be seen naked.]

   [1607] Deut. xxiii. 17.

   [1608] Rom. viii. 28, 29.

   [1609] Lev. xix. 29.

   [1610] [When the loss of the beard was a token of foppery and often of
   something worse, shaving would be frivolity; but here he treats of
   extirpation.]

   [1611] Ps. cxxxiii. 2.

   [1612] Ecclus. xix. 29, 30.

   [1613] Hesiod, Works and Days, i. 232.

   [1614] Of which they drink.

   [1615] [He took upon him our nature, flesh and blood. Heb. ii. 14-16.]
     

      Chapter IV.--With Whom We are to Associate.

   But really I have unwittingly deviated in spirit from the order, to
   which I must now revert, and must find fault with having large numbers
   of domestics. For, avoiding working with their own hands and serving
   themselves, men have recourse to servants, purchasing a great crowd of
   fine cooks, and of people to lay out the table, and of others to divide
   the meat skilfully into pieces. And the staff of servants is separated
   into many divisions; some labour for their gluttony, carvers and
   seasoners, and the compounders and makers of sweetmeats, and
   honey-cakes, and custards; others are occupied with their too numerous
   clothes; others guard the gold, like griffins; others keep the silver,
   and wipe the cups, and make ready what is needed to furnish the festive
   table; others rub down the horses; and a crowd of cup-bearers exert
   themselves in their service, and herds of beautiful boys, like cattle,
   from whom they milk away their beauty. And male and female assistants
   at the toilet are employed about the ladies--some for the mirrors, some
   for the head-dresses, others for the combs. Many are eunuchs; and these
   panders serve without suspicion those that wish to be free to enjoy
   their pleasures, because of the belief that they are unable to indulge
   in lust. But a true eunuch is not one who is unable, but one who is
   unwilling, to indulge in pleasure. The Word, testifying by the prophet
   Samuel to the Jews, who had transgressed when the people asked for a
   king, promised not a loving lord, but threatened to give them a
   self-willed and voluptuous tyrant, "who shall," He says, "take your
   daughters to be perfumers, and cooks, and bakers," [1616] ruling by the
   law of war, not desiring a peaceful administration. And there are many
   Celts, who bear aloft on their shoulders women's litters. But workers
   in wool, and spinners, and weavers, and female work and housekeeping,
   are nowhere.

   But those who impose on the women, spend the day with them, telling
   them silly amatory stories, and wearing out body and soul with their
   false acts and words. "Thou shalt not be with many," it is said, "for
   evil, nor give thyself to a multitude;" [1617] for wisdom shows itself
   among few, but disorder in a multitude. But it is not for grounds of
   propriety, on account of not wishing to be seen, that they purchase
   bearers, for it were commendable if out of such feelings they put
   themselves under a covering; but it is out of luxuriousness that they
   are carried on their domestics' shoulders, and desire to make a show.

   So, opening the curtain, and looking keenly round on all that direct
   their eyes towards them, they show their manners; and often bending
   forth from within, disgrace this superficial propriety by their
   dangerous restlessness. "Look not round," it is said, "in the streets
   of the city, and wander not in its lonely places." [1618] For that is,
   in truth, a lonely place, though there be a crowd of the licentious in
   it, where no wise man is present.

   And these women are carried about over the temples, sacrificing and
   practising divination day by day, spending their time with
   fortune-tellers, and begging priests, and disreputable old women; and
   they keep up old wives' whisperings over their cups, learning charms
   and incantations from soothsayers, to the ruin of the nuptial bonds.
   And some men they keep; by others they are kept; and others are
   promised them by the diviners. They know not that they are cheating
   themselves, and giving up themselves as a vessel of pleasure to those
   that wish to indulge in wantonness; and exchanging their purity for the
   foulest outrage, they think what is the most shameful ruin a great
   stroke of business. And there are many ministers to this meretricious
   licentiousness, insinuating themselves, one from one quarter, another
   from another. For the licentious rush readily into uncleanness, like
   swine rushing to that part of the hold of the ship which is depressed.
   Whence the Scripture most strenuously exhorts, "Introduce not every one
   into thy house, for the snares of the crafty are many." [1619] And in
   another place, "Let just men be thy guests, and in the fear of the Lord
   let thy boast remain." [1620] Away with fornication. "For know this
   well," says the apostle, "that no fornicator, or unclean person, or
   covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom
   of Christ and of God." [1621]

   But these women delight in intercourse with the effeminate. And crowds
   of abominable creatures (kinaides) flow in, of unbridled tongue, filthy
   in body, filthy in language; men enough for lewd offices, ministers of
   adultery, giggling and whispering, and shamelessly making through their
   noses sounds of lewdness and fornication to provoke lust, endeavouring
   to please by lewd words and attitudes, inciting to laughter, the
   precursor of fornication. And sometimes, when inflamed by any
   provocation, either these fornicators, or those that follow the rabble
   of abominable creatures to destruction, make a sound in their nose like
   a frog, as if they had got anger dwelling in their nostrils. But those
   who are more refined than these keep Indian birds and Median pea-fowls,
   and recline with peak-headed [1622] creatures; playing with satyrs,
   delighting in monsters. They laugh when they hear Thersites; and these
   women, purchasing Thersiteses highly valued, pride themselves not in
   their husbands, but in those wretches which are a burden on the earth,
   and overlook the chaste widow, who is of far higher value than a
   Melitaean pup, and look askance at a just old man, who is lovelier in my
   estimation than a monster purchased for money. And though maintaining
   parrots and curlews, they do not receive the orphan child; [1623] but
   they expose children that are born at home, and take up the young of
   birds, and prefer irrational to rational creatures; although they ought
   to undertake the maintenance of old people with a character for
   sobriety, who are fairer in my mind than apes, and capable of uttering
   something better than nightingales; and to set before them that saying,
   "He that pitieth the poor lendeth to the Lord;" [1624] and this,
   "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the least of these My brethren, ye
   have done it to Me." [1625] But these, on the other hand, prefer
   ignorance to wisdom, turning their wealth into stone, that is, into
   pearls and Indian emeralds. And they squander and throw away their
   wealth on fading dyes, and bought slaves; like crammed fowls scraping
   the dung of life. "Poverty," it is said, "humbles a man." [1626] By
   poverty is meant that niggardliness by which the rich are poor, having
   nothing to give away.
     

   [1616] 1 Sam. viii. 13.

   [1617] Ex. xxiii. 2.

   [1618] Ecclus. ix. 7.

   [1619] Ecclus. xi. 29.

   [1620] Ecclus. ix. 16.

   [1621] Eph. v. 5.

   [1622] phoxos, in allusion to Thersites, to which Homer applies this
   epithet.

   [1623] [The wasting on pet dogs, pups, and other animals, expense and
   pains which might help an orphan child, is a sin not yet uprooted. Here
   Clement's plea for widows, orphans, and aged men, prepares the way for
   Christian institutions in behalf of these classes. The same arguments
   should prevail with Christians in America.]

   [1624] Prov. xix. 17.

   [1625] Matt. xxv. 40.

   [1626] Prov. x. 4.
     

      Chapter V.--Behaviour in the Baths.

   And of what sort are their baths? Houses skilfully constructed,
   compact, portable, transparent, covered with fine linen. And
   gold-plated chairs, and silver ones, too, and ten thousand vessels of
   gold and silver, some for drinking, some for eating, some for bathing,
   are carried about with them. Besides these, there are even braziers of
   coals; for they have arrived at such a pitch of self-indulgence, that
   they sup and get drunk while bathing. And articles of silver with which
   they make a show, they ostentatiously set out in the baths, and thus
   display perchance their wealth out of excessive pride, but chiefly the
   capricious ignorance, through which they brand effeminate men, who have
   been vanquished by women; proving at least that they themselves cannot
   meet and cannot sweat without a multitude of vessels, although poor
   women who have no display equally enjoy their baths. The dirt of
   wealth, then, has an abundant covering of censure. With this, as with a
   bait, they hook the miserable creatures that gape at the glitter of
   gold. For dazzling thus those fond of display, they artfully try to win
   the admiration of their lovers, who after a little insult them naked.
   They will scarce strip before their own husbands affecting a plausible
   pretence of modesty; but any others who wish, may see them at home shut
   up naked in their baths. For there they are not ashamed to strip before
   spectators, as if exposing their persons for sale. But Hesiod advises


   "Not to wash the skin in the women's bath." [1627]

   The baths are opened promiscuously to men and women; and there they
   strip for licentious indulgence (for from looking, men get to loving),
   as if their modesty had been washed away in the bath. [1628] Those who
   have not become utterly destitute of modesty shut out strangers; but
   bathe with their own servants, and strip naked before their slaves, and
   are rubbed by them; giving to the crouching menial liberty to lust, by
   permitting fearless handling. For those who are introduced before their
   naked mistresses while in the bath, study to strip themselves in order
   to audacity in lust, casting off fear in consequence of the wicked
   custom. The ancient athletes, [1629] ashamed to exhibit a man naked,
   preserved their modesty by going through the contest in drawers; but
   these women, divesting themselves of their modesty along with their
   tunic, wish to appear beautiful, but contrary to their wish are simply
   proved to be wicked. [1630] For through the body itself the wantonness
   of lust shines clearly; as in the case of dropsical people, the water
   covered by the skin. Disease in both is known from the look. Men,
   therefore, affording to women a noble example of truth, ought to be
   ashamed at their stripping before them, and guard against these
   dangerous sights; "for he who has looked curiously," it is said, "hath
   sinned already." [1631] At home, therefore, they ought to regard with
   modesty parents and domestics; in the ways, those they meet; in the
   baths, women; in solitude, themselves; and everywhere the Word, who is
   everywhere, "and without Him was not anything." [1632] For so only
   shall one remain without falling, if he regard God as ever present with
   him.
     

   [1627] Hesiod, Works and Days, ii. 371.

   [1628] [Such were women before the Gospel came. See note to Hermas,
   cap. xi. [17]note 1, p. 47, this volume, and [18]Elucidation (p. 57) of
   the same.]

   [1629] [The barbarians were more decent than the Greeks, being nearer
   to the state of nature, which is a better guide than pagan
   civilization. But see the interesting note of Rawlinson (Herod., vol.
   i. p. 125, ed. New York), who quotes Thucydides (i. 6) to prove the
   recent invasion of immodest exposure even among athletes. Our author
   has this same quotation in mind, for he almost translates it here.]

   [1630] [Attic girls raced in the games quite naked. Spartan girls wore
   only the linen chiton, even in the company of men; and this was
   esteemed nudity, not unjustly. David's "uncovering himself" (2 Sam. vi.
   20) was nudity of the same sort. Married women assumed to peplus.]

   [1631] Matt. v. 28.

   [1632] John i. 3.
     

      Chapter VI.--The Christian Alone Rich.

   Riches are then to be partaken of rationally, bestowed lovingly, not
   sordidly, or pompously; nor is the love of the beautiful to be turned
   into self-love and ostentation; lest perchance some one say to us, "His
   horse, or land, or domestic, or gold, is worth fifteen talents; but the
   man himself is dear at three coppers."

   Take away, then, directly the ornaments from women, and domestics from
   masters, and you will find masters in no respect different from bought
   slaves in step, or look, or voice, so like are they to their slaves.
   But they differ in that they are feebler than their slaves, and have a
   more sickly upbringing.

   This best of maxims, then, ought to be perpetually repeated, "That the
   good man, being temperate and just," treasures up his wealth in heaven.
   He who has sold his worldly goods, and given them to the poor, finds
   the imperishable treasure, "where is neither moth nor robber." Blessed
   truly is he, "though he be insignificant, and feeble, and obscure;" and
   he is truly rich with the greatest of all riches. "Though a man, then,
   be richer than Cinyras and Midas, and is wicked," and haughty as he who
   was luxuriously clothed in purple and fine linen, and despised Lazarus,
   "he is miserable, and lives in trouble," and shall not live. Wealth
   seems to me to be like a serpent, which will twist round the hand and
   bite; unless one knows how to lay hold of it without danger by the
   point of the tail. And riches, wriggling either in an experienced or
   inexperienced grasp, are dexterous at adhering and biting; unless one,
   despising them, use them skilfully, so as to crush the creature by the
   charm of the Word, and himself escape unscathed.

   But, as is reasonable, he alone, who possesses what is worth most,
   turns out truly rich, though not recognised as such. And it is not
   jewels, or gold, or clothing, or beauty of person, that are of high
   value, but virtue; which is the Word given by the Instructor to be put
   in practice. This is the Word, who abjures luxury, but calls self-help
   as a servant, and praises frugality, the progeny of temperance.
   "Receive," he says, "instruction, and not silver, and knowledge rather
   than tested gold; for Wisdom is better than precious stones, nor is
   anything that is valuable equal in worth to her." [1633] And again:
   "Acquire me rather than gold, and precious stones, and silver; for my
   produce is better than choice silver." [1634]

   But if we must distinguish, let it be granted that he is rich who has
   many possessions, loaded with gold like a dirty purse; but the
   righteous alone is graceful, because grace is order, observing a due
   and decorous measure in managing and distributing. "For there are those
   who sow and reap more," [1635] of whom it is written, "He hath
   dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for
   ever." [1636] So that it is not he who has and keeps, but he who gives
   away, that is rich; and it is giving away, not possession, which
   renders a man happy; and the fruit of the Spirit is generosity. It is
   in the soul, then, that riches are. Let it, then, be granted that good
   things are the property only of good men; and Christians are good. Now,
   a fool or a libertine can neither have any perception of what is good,
   nor obtain possession of it. Accordingly, good things are possessed by
   Christians alone. And nothing is richer than these good things;
   therefore these alone are rich. For righteousness is true riches; and
   the Word is more valuable than all treasure, not accruing from cattle
   and fields, but given by God--riches which cannot be taken away. The
   soul alone is its treasure. It is the best possession to its possessor,
   rendering man truly blessed. For he whose it is to desire nothing that
   is not in our power, and to obtain by asking from God what he piously
   desires, does he not possess much, nay all, having God as his
   everlasting treasure? "To him that asks," it is said, "shall be given,
   and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." [1637] If God denies
   nothing, all things belong to the godly.
     

   [1633] Prov. viii. 10, 11.

   [1634] Prov. viii. 19.

   [1635] Prov. xi. 24.

   [1636] Ps. cxii. 9.

   [1637] Matt. vii. 7, 8.
     

      Chapter VII.--Frugality a Good Provision for the Christian.

   Delicacies spent on pleasures become a dangerous shipwreck to men; for
   this voluptuous and ignoble life of the many is alien to true love for
   the beautiful and to refined pleasures. For man is by nature an erect
   and majestic being, aspiring after the good as becomes the creature of
   the One. But the life which crawls on its belly is destitute of
   dignity, is scandalous, hateful, ridiculous. And to the divine nature
   voluptuousness is a thing most alien; for this is for a man to be like
   sparrows in feeding, and swine and goats in lechery. For to regard
   pleasure as a good thing, is the sign of utter ignorance of what is
   excellent. Love of wealth displaces a man from the right mode of life,
   and induces him to cease from feeling shame at what is shameful; if
   only, like a beast, he has power to eat all sorts of things, and to
   drink in like manner, and to satiate in every way his lewd desires. And
   so very rarely does he inherit the kingdom of God. For what end, then,
   are such dainty dishes prepared, but to fill one belly? The filthiness
   of gluttony is proved by the sewers into which our bellies discharge
   the refuse of our food. For what end do they collect so many
   cupbearers, when they might satisfy themselves with one cup? For what
   the chests of clothes? and the gold ornaments for what? Those things
   are prepared for clothes-stealers, and scoundrels, and for greedy eyes.
   "But let alms and faith not fail thee," [1638] says the Scripture.

   Look, for instance, to Elias the Thesbite, in whom we have a beautiful
   example of frugality, when he sat down beneath the thorn, and the angel
   brought him food. "It was a cake of barley and a jar of water." [1639]
   Such the Lord sent as best for him. We, then, on our journey to the
   truth, must be unencumbered. "Carry not," said the Lord, "purse, nor
   scrip, nor shoes;" [1640] that is, possess not wealth, which is only
   treasured up in a purse; fill not your own stores, as if laying up
   produce in a bag, but communicate to those who have need. Do not
   trouble yourselves about horses and servants, who, as bearing burdens
   when the rich are travelling, are allegorically called shoes.

   We must, then, cast away the multitude of vessels, silver and gold
   drinking cups, and the crowd of domestics, receiving as we have done
   from the Instructor the fair and grave attendants, Self-help and
   Simplicity. And we must walk suitably to the Word; and if there be a
   wife and children, the house is not a burden, having learned to change
   its place along with the sound-minded traveller. The wife who loves her
   husband must be furnished for travel similarly to her husband. A fair
   provision for the journey to heaven is theirs who bear frugality with
   chaste gravity. And as the foot is the measure of the shoe, so also is
   the body of what each individual possesses. But that which is
   superfluous, what they call ornaments and the furniture of the rich, is
   a burden, not an ornament to the body. He who climbs to the heavens by
   force, must carry with him the fair staff of beneficence, and attain to
   the true rest by communicating to those who are in distress. For the
   Scripture avouches, "that the true riches of the soul are a man's
   ransom," [1641] that is, if he is rich, he will be saved by
   distributing it. For as gushing wells, when pumped out, rise again to
   their former measure, [1642] so giving away, being the benignant spring
   of love, by communicating of its drink to the thirsty, again increases
   and is replenished, just as the milk is wont to flow into the breasts
   that are sucked or milked. For he who has the almighty God, the Word,
   is in want of nothing, and never is in straits for what he needs. For
   the Word is a possession that wants nothing, and is the cause of all
   abundance. If one say that he has often seen the righteous man in need
   of food, this is rare, and happens only where there is not another
   righteous man. [1643] Notwithstanding let him read what follows: "For
   the righteous man shall not live by bread alone, but by the word of the
   Lord," [1644] who is the true bread, the bread of the heavens. The good
   man, then, can never be in difficulties so long as he keeps intact his
   confession towards God. For it appertains to him to ask and to receive
   whatever he requires from the Father of all; and to enjoy what is his
   own, if he keep the Son. And this also appertains to him, to feel no
   want.

   This Word, who trains us, confers on us the true riches. Nor is the
   growing rich an object of envy to those who possess through Him the
   privilege of wanting nothing. He that has this wealth shall inherit the
   kingdom of God.
     

   [1638] Prov. iii. 5.

   [1639] 1 Kings xix. 4, 6.

   [1640] Luke x. 4.

   [1641] Prov. xiii. 8.

   [1642] [Kaye, p. 97.]

   [1643] [A beautiful apophthegm, and admirably interpretative of Ps.
   xxxvii. 25.]

   [1644] Deut. viii. 3; Matt. iv. 4.
     

      Chapter VIII.--Similitudes and Examples a Most Important Part of Right
      Instruction.

   And if any one of you shall entirely avoid luxury, he will, by a frugal
   upbringing, train himself to the endurance of involuntary labours, by
   employing constantly voluntary afflictions as training exercises for
   persecutions; so that when he comes to compulsory labours, and fears,
   and griefs, he will not be unpracticed in endurance.

   Wherefore we have no country on earth, that we may despise earthly
   possessions. And frugality [1645] is in the highest degree rich, being
   equal to unfailing expenditure, bestowed on what is requisite, and to
   the degree requisite. For tele has the meaning of expenses.

   How a husband is to live with his wife, and respecting self-help, and
   housekeeping, and the employment of domestics; and further, with
   respect to the time of marriage, and what is suitable for wives, we
   have treated in the discourse concerning marriage. What pertains to
   discipline alone is reserved now for description, as we delineate the
   life of Christians. The most indeed has been already said, and laid
   down in the form of disciplinary rules. What still remains we shall
   subjoin; for examples are of no small moment in determining to
   salvation. [1646]

   See, says the tragedy,


   "The consort of Ulysses was not killed

   By Telemachus; for she did not take a husband in addition to a husband,

   But in the house the marriage-bed remains unpolluted." [1647]

   Reproaching foul adultery, he showed the fair image of chastity in
   affection to her husband.

   The Lacedaemonians compelling the Helots, their servants (Helots is the
   name of their servants), to get drunk, exhibited their drunken pranks
   before themselves, who were temperate, for cure and correction.

   Observing, accordingly, their unseemly behaviour, in order that they
   themselves might not fall into like censurable conduct, they trained
   themselves, turning the reproach of the drunkards to the advantage of
   keeping themselves free from fault.

   For some men being instructed are saved; and others, self-taught,
   either aspire after or seek virtue.


   "He truly is the best of all who himself perceives all things." [1648]

   Such is Abraham, who sought God.


   "And good, again, is he who obeys him who advises well." [1649]

   Such are those disciples who obeyed the Word. Wherefore the former was
   called "friend," the latter "apostles;" the one diligently seeking, and
   the other preaching one and the same God. And both are peoples, and
   both these have hearers, the one who is profited through seeking, the
   other who is saved through finding.


   "But whoever neither himself perceives, nor, hearing another,

   Lays to heart--he is a worthless man." [1650]

   The other people is the Gentile--useless; this is the people that
   followeth not Christ. Nevertheless the Instructor, lover of man,
   helping in many ways, partly exhorts, partly upbraids. Others having
   sinned, He shows us their baseness, and exhibits the punishment
   consequent upon it, alluring while admonishing, planning to dissuade us
   in love from evil, by the exhibition of those who have suffered from it
   before. By which examples He very manifestly checked those who had been
   evil-disposed, and hindered those who were daring like deeds; and
   others He brought to a foundation of patience; others He stopped from
   wickedness; and others He cured by the contemplation of what is like,
   bringing them over to what is better.

   For who, when following one in the way, and then on the former falling
   into a pit, would not guard against incurring equal danger, by taking
   care not to follow him in his slip? What athlete, again, who has
   learned the way to glory, and has seen the combatant who had preceded
   him receiving the prize, does not exert himself for the crown,
   imitating the elder one?

   Such images of divine wisdom are many; but I shall mention one
   instance, and expound it in a few words. The fate of the Sodomites was
   judgment to those who had done wrong, instruction to those who hear.
   The Sodomites having, through much luxury, fallen into uncleanness,
   practising adultery shamelessly, and burning with insane love for boys;
   the All-seeing Word, whose notice those who commit impieties cannot
   escape, cast His eye on them. Nor did the sleepless guard of humanity
   observe their licentiousness in silence; but dissuading us from the
   imitation of them, and training us up to His own temperance, and
   falling on some sinners, lest lust being unavenged, should break loose
   from all the restraints of fear, ordered Sodom to be burned, pouring
   forth a little of the sagacious fire on licentiousness; lest lust,
   through want of punishment, should throw wide the gates to those that
   were rushing into voluptuousness. Accordingly, the just punishment of
   the Sodomites became to men an image of the salvation which is well
   calculated for men. For those who have not committed like sins with
   those who are punished, will never receive a like punishment. By
   guarding against sinning, we guard against suffering. "For I would have
   you know," says Jude, "that God, having once saved His people from the
   land of Egypt, afterwards destroyed them that believed not; and the
   angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
   habitation, He hath reserved to the judgment of the great day, in
   everlasting chains under darkness of the savage angels." [1651] And a
   little after he sets forth, in a most instructive manner,
   representations of those that are judged: "Woe unto them, for they have
   gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam,
   and perished in the gainsaying of Core." For those, who cannot attain
   the privilege of adoption, fear keeps from growing insolent. For
   punishments and threats are for this end, that fearing the penalty we
   may abstain from sinning. I might relate to you punishments for
   ostentation, and punishments for vainglory, not only for
   licentiousness; and adduce the censures pronounced on those whose
   hearts are bad through wealth, [1652] in which censures the Word
   through fear restrains from evil acts. But sparing prolixity in my
   treatise, I shall bring forward the following precepts of the
   Instructor, that you may guard against His threatenings.
     

   [1645] The word used by Clement here for frugality is euteleia, and he
   supposes the word to mean originally "spending well." A proper way of
   spending money is as good as unfailing riches, since it always has
   enough for all that is necessary.

   [1646] [This plea for similitudes illustrates the principle of Hermas,
   and the ground of the currency of his Pastor.]

   [1647] Euripides, Orestes, 588-590.

   [1648] Hesiod, Works and Days, i. 291.

   [1649] Ibid.

   [1650] Ibid.

   [1651] Jude 5, 6.

   [1652] Following Lowth's conjecture of kakophronon insteasd of that of
   the text, kakophronas.
     

      Chapter IX.--Why We are to Use the Bath.

   There are, then, four reasons for the bath (for from that point I
   digressed in my oration), for which we frequent it: for cleanliness, or
   heat, or health, or lastly, for pleasure. Bathing for pleasure is to be
   omitted. For unblushing pleasure must be cut out by the roots; and the
   bath is to be taken by women for cleanliness and health, by men for
   health alone. [1653] To bathe for the sake of heat is a superfluity,
   since one may restore what is frozen by the cold in other ways.
   Constant use of the bath, too, impairs strength and relaxes the
   physical energies, and often induces debility and fainting. For in a
   way the body drinks, like trees, not only by the mouth, but also over
   the whole body in bathing, by what they call the pores. In proof of
   this often people, when thirsty, by going afterwards into the water,
   have assuaged their thirst. Unless, then, the bath is for some use, we
   ought not to indulge in it. The ancients called them places for fulling
   [1654] men, since they wrinkle men's bodies sooner than they ought, and
   by cooking them, as it were, compel them to become prematurely old. The
   flesh, like iron, being softened by the heat, hence we require cold, as
   it were, to temper and give an edge. Nor must we bathe always; but if
   one is a little exhausted, or, on the other hand, filled to repletion,
   the bath is to be forbidden, regard being had to the age of the body
   and the season of the year. For the bath is not beneficial to all, or
   always, as those who are skilled in these things own. But due
   proportion, which on all occasions we call as our helper in life,
   suffices for us. For we must not so use the bath as to require an
   assistant, nor are we to bathe constantly and often in the day as we
   frequent the market-place. But to have the water poured over us by
   several people is an outrage on our neighbours, through fondness for
   luxuriousness, and is done by those who will not understand that the
   bath is common to all the bathers equally.

   But most of all is it necessary to wash the soul in the cleansing Word
   (sometimes the body too, on account of the dirt which gathers and grows
   to it, sometimes also to relieve fatigue). "Woe unto you, scribes and
   Pharisees, hypocrites!" saith the Lord, "for ye are like to whited
   sepulchres. Without, the sepulchre appears beautiful, but within it is
   full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness." [1655] And again He says
   to the same people, "Woe unto you! for ye cleanse the outside of the
   cup and platter, but within are full of uncleanness. Cleanse first the
   inside of the cup, that the outside may be clean also." [1656] The best
   bath, then, is what rubs off the pollution of the soul, and is
   spiritual. Of which prophecy speaks expressly: "The Lord will wash away
   the filth of the sons and daughters of Israel, and will purge the blood
   from the midst of them" [1657] --the blood of crime and the murders of
   the prophets. And the mode of cleansing, the Word subjoined, saying,
   "by the spirit of judgment and the spirit of burning." The bathing
   which is carnal, that is to say, of the body, is accomplished by water
   alone, as often in the country where there is not a bath. [1658]
     

   [1653] [The morals of Clement as to decency in bathing need to be
   enforced among modern Christians, at seaside places of resort.]

   [1654] anthropognapheia.

   [1655] Matt. xxiii. 27.

   [1656] Matt. xxiii. 25, 26.

   [1657] Isa. iv. 4.

   [1658] Isa. iv. 4.
     

      Chapter X.--The Exercises Suited to a Good Life.

   The gymnasium is sufficient for boys, even if a bath is within reach.
   And even for men to prefer gymnastic exercises by far to the baths, is
   perchance not bad, since they are in some respects conducive to the
   health of young men, and produce exertion--emulation to aim at not only
   a healthy habit of body, but courageousness of soul. When this is done
   without dragging a man away from better employments, it is pleasant,
   and not unprofitable. Nor are women to be deprived of bodily exercise.
   But they are not to be encouraged to engage in wrestling or running,
   but are to exercise themselves in spinning, and weaving, and
   superintending the cooking if necessary. And they are, with their own
   hand, to fetch from the store what we require. And it is no disgrace
   for them to apply themselves to the mill. Nor is it a reproach to a
   wife--housekeeper and helpmeet--to occupy herself in cooking, so that
   it may be palatable to her husband. And if she shake up the couch,
   reach drink to her husband when thirsty, set food on the table as
   neatly as possible, and so give herself exercise tending to sound
   health, the Instructor will approve of a woman like this, who
   "stretches forth her arms to useful tasks, rests her hands on the
   distaff, opens her hand to the poor, and extends her wrist to the
   beggar." [1659]

   She who emulates Sarah is not ashamed of that highest of ministries,
   helping wayfarers. For Abraham said to her, "Haste, and knead three
   measures of meal, and make cakes." [1660] "And Rachel, the daughter of
   Laban, came," it is said, "with her father's sheep." [1661] Nor was
   this enough; but to teach humility it is added, "for she fed her
   father's sheep." [1662] And innumerable such examples of frugality and
   self-help, and also of exercises, are furnished by the Scriptures. In
   the case of men, let some strip and engage in wrestling; let some play
   at the small ball, especially the game they call Pheninda, [1663] in
   the sun. To others who walk into the country, or go down into the town,
   the walk is sufficient exercise. And were they to handle the hoe, this
   stroke of economy in agricultural labour would not be ungentleman like.

   I had almost forgot to say that the well-known Pittacus, king of
   Miletus, practiced the laborious exercise of turning the mill. [1664]
   It is respectable for a man to draw water for himself, and to cut
   billets of wood which he is to use himself. Jacob fed the sheep of
   Laban that were left in his charge, having as a royal badge "a rod of
   storax," [1665] which aimed by its wood to change and improve nature.
   And reading aloud is often an exercise to many. But let not such
   athletic contests, as we have allowed, be undertaken for the sake of
   vainglory, but for the exuding of manly sweat. Nor are we to straggle
   with cunning and showiness, but in a stand-up wrestling bout, by
   disentangling of neck, hands, and sides. For such a struggle with
   graceful strength is more becoming and manly, being undertaken for the
   sake of serviceable and profitable health. But let those others, who
   profess the practice of illiberal postures in gymnastics, be dismissed.
   We must always aim at moderation. For as it is best that labour should
   precede food, so to labour above measure is both very bad, very
   exhausting, and apt to make us ill. Neither, then, should we be idle
   altogether, nor completely fatigued. For similarly to what we have laid
   down with respect to food, are we to do everywhere and with everything.
   Our mode of life is not to accustom us to voluptuousness and
   licentiousness, nor to the opposite extreme, but to the medium between
   these, that which is harmonious and temperate, and free of either evil,
   luxury and parsimony. And now, as we have also previously remarked,
   attending to one's own wants is an exercise free of pride,--as, for
   example, putting on one's own shoes, washing one's own feet, and also
   rubbing one's self when anointed with oil. To render one who has rubbed
   you the same service in return, is an exercise of reciprocal justice;
   and to sleep beside a sick friend, help the infirm, and supply him who
   is in want, are proper exercises. "And Abraham," it is said, "served up
   for three, dinner under a tree, and waited on them as they ate." [1666]
   The same with fishing, [1667] as in the case of Peter, if we have
   leisure from necessary instructions in the Word. But that is the better
   enjoyment which the Lord assigned to the disciple, when He taught him
   to "catch men" as fishes in the water.
     

   [1659] Prov. xxxi. 19, 20, Septuagint.

   [1660] Gen. xviii. 6.

   [1661] Gen. xxix. 9.

   [1662] Ibid.

   [1663] pheninda or phennis.

   [1664] The text has elthen. The true reading, doubtless, is elethen.
   That Pittacus exercised himself thus, is stated by Isidore of Pelusium,
   Diogenes, Laertius, Plutarch.

   [1665] Gen. xxx. 37. Not "poplar," as in A.V. [See Abp. Leighton on
   "Laban's lambs," Comm. on St. Peter, part i. p. 360, and questionable
   note of an admirable editor, same page.]

   [1666] Gen. xviii. 8.

   [1667] [The old canons allowed to clergymen the recreation of fishing,
   but not the chase, or fowling. Of this, the godly Izaak Walton fails
   not to remind us. Complete Angler, p. 38, learned note, and preface by
   the late Dr. Bethune. New York, 1847.]
     

      Chapter XI.--A Compendious View of the Christian Life.

   Wherefore the wearing of gold and the use of softer clothing is not to
   be entirely prohibited. But irrational impulses must be curbed, lest,
   carrying us away through excessive relaxation, they impel us to
   voluptuousness. For luxury, that has dashed on to surfeit, is prone to
   kick up its heels and toss its mane, and shake off the charioteer, the
   Instructor; who, pulling back the reins from far, leads and drives to
   salvation the human horse--that is, the irrational part of the
   soul--which is wildly bent on pleasures, and vicious appetites, and
   precious stones, and gold, and variety of dress, and other luxuries.

   Above all, we are to keep in mind what was spoken sacredly: "Having
   your conversation honest among the Gentiles; that, whereas they speak
   against you as evil-doers, they may, by the good works which they
   behold, glorify God." [1668]

        Clothes.

   The Instructor permits us, then, to use simple clothing, and of a white
   colour, as we said before. So that, accommodating ourselves not to
   variegated art, but to nature as it is produced, and pushing away
   whatever is deceptive and belies the truth, we may embrace the
   uniformity and simplicity of the truth. [1669]

   Sophocles, reproaching a youth, says:--


   "Decked in women's clothes."

   For, as in the case of the soldier, the sailor, and the ruler, so also
   the proper dress of the temperate man is what is plain, becoming, and
   clean. Whence also in the law, the law enacted by Moses about leprousy
   rejects what has many colours and spots, like the various scales of the
   snake. He therefore wishes man, no longer decking himself gaudily in a
   variety of colours, but white all over from the crown of the head to
   the sole of the foot, to be clean; so that, by a transition from the
   body, we may lay aside the varied and versatile passions of the man,
   and love the unvaried, and unambiguous, and simple colour of truth. And
   he who also in this emulates Moses--Plato best of all--approves of that
   texture on which not more than a chaste woman's work has been employed.
   And white colours well become gravity. And elsewhere he says, "Nor
   apply dyes or weaving, except for warlike decorations." [1670]

   To men of peace and of light, therefore, white is appropriate. [1671]
   As, then, signs, which are very closely allied to causes, by their
   presence indicate, or rather demonstrate, the existence of the result;
   as smoke is the sign of fire, and a good complexion and a regular pulse
   of health; so also clothing of this description shows the character of
   our habits. Temperance is pure and simple; since purity is a habit
   which ensures pure conduct unmixed with what is base. Simplicity is a
   habit which does away with superfluities.

   Substantial clothing also, and chiefly what is unfulled, protects the
   heat which is in the body; not that the clothing has heat in itself,
   but that it turns back the heat issuing from the body, and refuses it a
   passage. And whatever heat falls upon it, it absorbs and retains, and
   being warmed by it, warms in turn the body. And for this reason it is
   chiefly to be worn in winter.

   It also (temperance) is contented. And contentment is a habit which
   dispenses with superfluities, and, that there may be no failure, is
   receptive of what suffices for the healthful and blessed life according
   to the Word. [1672]

   Let the women wear a plain and becoming dress, but softer than what is
   suitable for a man, yet not quite immodest or entirely gone in luxury.
   And let the garments be suited to age, person, figure, nature,
   pursuits. For the divine apostle most beautifully counsels us "to put
   on Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the lusts of the flesh."
   [1673]

        Ear-rings.

   The Word prohibits us from doing violence to nature [1674] by boring
   the lobes of the ears. For why not the nose too?--so that, what was
   spoken, may be fulfilled: "As an ear-ring in a swine's nose, so is
   beauty to a woman without discretion." [1675] For, in a word, if one
   thinks himself made beautiful by gold, he is inferior to gold; and he
   that is inferior to gold is not lord of it. But to confess one's self
   less ornamental than the Lydian ore, how monstrous! As, then, the gold
   is polluted by the dirtiness of the sow, which stirs up the mire with
   her snout, so those women that are luxurious to excess in their
   wantonness, elated by wealth, dishonour by the stains of amatory
   indulgences what is the true beauty.

        Finger-rings.

   The Word, then, permits them a finger-ring of gold. [1676] Nor is this
   for ornament, but for sealing things which are worth keeping safe in
   the house in the exercise of their charge of housekeeping.

   For if all were well trained, there would be no need of seals, if
   servants and masters were equally honest. But since want of training
   produces an inclination to dishonesty, we require seals.

   But there are circumstances in which this strictness may relaxed. For
   allowance must sometimes be made in favour of those women who have not
   been fortunate [1677] in falling in with chaste husbands, and adorn
   themselves in order to please their husbands. But let desire for the
   admiration of their husbands alone be proposed as their aim. I would
   not have them to devote themselves to personal display, but to attract
   their husbands by chaste love for them--a powerful and legitimate
   charm. But since they wish their wives to be unhappy in mind, let the
   latter, if they would be chaste, make it their aim to allay by degrees
   the irrational impulses and passions of their husbands. And they are to
   be gently drawn to simplicity, by gradually accustoming them to
   sobriety. For decency is not produced by the imposition of what is
   burdensome, but by the abstraction of excess. For women's articles of
   luxury are to be prohibited, as things of swift wing producing unstable
   follies and empty delights; by which, elated and furnished with wings,
   they often fly away from the marriage bonds. Wherefore also women ought
   to dress neatly, and bind themselves around with the band of chaste
   modesty, lest through giddiness they slip away from the truth. It is
   right, then, for men to repose confidence in their wives, and commit
   the charge of the household to them, as they are given to be their
   helpers in this.

   And if it is necessary for us, while engaged in public business, or
   discharging other avocations in the country, and often away from our
   wives, to seal anything for the sake of safety, He (the Word) allows us
   a signet for this purpose only. Other finger-rings are to be cast off,
   since, according to the Scripture, "instruction is a golden ornament
   for a wise man." [1678]

   But women who wear gold seem to me to be afraid, lest, if one strip
   them of their jewellery, they should be taken for servants, without
   their ornaments. But the nobility of truth, discovered in the native
   beauty which has its seat in the soul, judges the slave not by buying
   and selling, but by a servile disposition. And it is incumbent on us
   not to seem, but to be free, trained by God, adopted by God.

   Wherefore we must adopt a mode of standing and motion, and a step, and
   dress, and in a word, a mode of life, in all respects as worthy as
   possible of freemen. But men are not to wear the ring on the joint; for
   this is feminine; but to place it on the little finger at its root. For
   so the hand will be freest for work, in whatever we need it; and the
   signet will not very easily fall off, being guarded by the large knot
   of the joint.

   And let our seals be either a dove, or a fish, or a ship scudding
   before the wind, or a musical lyre, which Polycrates used, or a ship's
   anchor, which Seleucus got engraved as a device; and if there be one
   fishing, he will remember the apostle, and the children drawn out of
   the water. For we are not to delineate the faces of idols, [1679] we
   who are prohibited to cleave to them; nor a sword, nor a bow, following
   as we do, peace; nor drinking-cups, being temperate.

   Many of the licentious have their lovers [1680] engraved, [1681] or
   their mistresses, as if they wished to make it impossible ever to
   forget their amatory indulgences, by being perpetually put in mind of
   their licentiousness.

        The Hair.

   About the hair, the following seems right. Let the head of men be
   shaven, unless it has curly hair. But let the chin have the hair. But
   let not twisted locks hang far down from the head, gliding into
   womanish ringlets. For an ample beard suffices for men. And if one,
   too, shave a part of his beard, it must not be made entirely bare, for
   this is a disgraceful sight. The shaving of the chin to the skin is
   reprehensible, approaching to plucking out the hair and smoothing. For
   instance, thus the Psalmist, delighted with the hair of the beard,
   says, "As the ointment that descends on the beard, the beard of Aaron."
   [1682]

   Having celebrated the beauty of the beard by a repetition, he made the
   face to shine with the ointment of the Lord.

   Since cropping is to be adopted not for the sake of elegance, but on
   account of the necessity of the case; the hair of the head, that it may
   not grow so long as to come down and interfere with the eyes, and that
   of the moustache similarly, which is dirtied in eating, is to be cut
   round, not by the razor, for that were not well-bred, but by a pair of
   cropping scissors. But the hair on the chin is not to be disturbed, as
   it gives no trouble, and lends to the face dignity and paternal terror.
   [1683]

   Moreover, the shape instructs many not to sin, because it renders
   detection easy. To those who do [not] [1684] wish to sin openly, a
   habit that will escape observation and is not conspicuous is most
   agreeable, which, when assumed, will allow them to transgress without
   detection; so that, being undistinguishable from others, they may
   fearlessly go their length in sinning. [1685] A cropped head not only
   shows a man to be grave, but renders the cranium less liable to injury,
   by accustoming it to the presence of both cold and heat; and it averts
   the mischiefs arising from these, which the hair absorbs into itself
   like a sponge, and so inflicts on the brain constant mischief from the
   moisture.

   It is enough for women to protect [1686] their locks, and bind up their
   hair simply along the neck with a plain hair-pin, nourishing chaste
   locks with simple care to true beauty. For meretricious plaiting of the
   hair, and putting it up in tresses, contribute to make them look ugly,
   cutting the hair and plucking off it those treacherous braidings; on
   account of which they do not touch their head, being afraid of
   disordering their hair. Sleep, too, comes on, not without fear lest
   they pull down without knowing the shape of the braid.

   But additions of other people's hair are entirely to be rejected, and
   it is a most sacrilegious thing for spurious hair to shade the head,
   covering the skull with dead locks. For on whom does the presbyter lay
   his hand? [1687] Whom does he bless? Not the woman decked out, but
   another's hair, and through them another head. And if "the man is head
   of the woman, and God of the man," [1688] how is it not impious that
   they should fall into double sins? For they deceive the men by the
   excessive quantity of their hair; and shame the Lord as far as in them
   lies, by adorning themselves meretriciously, in order to dissemble the
   truth. And they defame the head, which is truly beautiful.

   Consequently neither is the hair to be dyed, nor grey hair to have its
   colour changed. For neither are we allowed to diversify our dress. And
   above all, old age, which conciliates trust, is not to be concealed.
   But God's mark of honour is to be shown in the light of day, to win the
   reverence of the young. For sometimes, when they have been behaving
   shamefully, the appearance of hoary hairs, arriving like an instructor,
   has changed them to sobriety, and paralyzed juvenile lust with the
   splendour of the sight.

        Painting the Face.

   Nor are the women to smear their faces with the ensnaring devices of
   wily cunning. But let us show to them the decoration of sobriety. For,
   in the first place, the best beauty is that which is spiritual, as we
   have often pointed out. For when the soul is adorned by the Holy
   Spirit, and inspired with the radiant charms which proceed from
   Him,--righteousness, wisdom, fortitude, temperance, love of the good,
   modesty, than which no more blooming colour was ever seen,--then let
   corporeal beauty be cultivated too, symmetry of limbs and members, with
   a fair complexion. The adornment of health is here in place, through
   which the transition of the artificial image to the truth, in
   accordance with the form which has been given by God, is effected. But
   temperance in drinks, and moderation in articles of food, are effectual
   in producing beauty according to nature; for not only does the body
   maintain its health from these, but they also make beauty to appear.
   For from what is fiery arises a gleam and sparkle; and from moisture,
   brightness and grace; and from dryness, strength and firmness; and from
   what is aërial, free-breathing and equipoise; from which this
   well-proportioned and beautiful image of the Word is adorned. Beauty is
   the free flower of health; for the latter is produced within the body;
   while the former, blossoming out from the body, exhibits manifest
   beauty of complexion. Accordingly, these most decorous and healthful
   practices, by exercising the body, produce true and lasting beauty, the
   heat attracting to itself all the moisture and cold spirit. Heat, when
   agitated by moving causes, is a thing which attracts to itself; and
   when it does attract, it gently exhales through the flesh itself, when
   warmed, the abundance of food, with some moisture, but with excess of
   heat. Wherefore also the first food is carried off. But when the body
   is not moved, the food consumed does not adhere, but falls away, as the
   loaf from a cold oven, either entire, or leaving only the lower part.
   Accordingly, the foeces are in excess in the case of those who do not
   throw off the excrementitious matters by the rubbings necessitated by
   exercise. And other superfluous matters abound in their case too, and
   also perspiration, as the food is not assimilated by the body, but is
   flowing out to waste. Thence also lusts are excited, the redundance
   flowing to the pudenda by commensurate motions. Wherefore this
   redundance ought to be liquefied and dispersed for digestion, by which
   beauty acquires its ruddy hue. But it is monstrous for those who are
   made in "the image and likeness of God," to dishonour the archetype by
   assuming a foreign ornament, preferring the mischievous contrivance of
   man to the divine creation.

   The Instructor orders them to go forth "in becoming apparel, and adorn
   themselves with shamefacedness and sobriety," [1689] "subject to their
   own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they may without the word
   be won by the conversation of the wives; while they behold," he says,
   "your chaste conversation. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward
   adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on
   of apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is
   not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is
   in the sight of God of great price." [1690]

   For the labour of their own hands, above all, adds genuine beauty to
   women, exercising their bodies and adorning themselves by their own
   exertions; not bringing unornamental ornament wrought by others, which
   is vulgar and meretricious, but that of every good woman, supplied and
   woven by her own hands whenever she most requires. For it is never
   suitable for women whose lives are framed according to God, to appear
   arrayed in things bought from the market, but in their own home-made
   work. For a most beautiful thing is a thrifty wife, who clothes both
   herself and her husband with fair array of her own working; [1691] in
   which all are glad--the children on account of their mother, the
   husband on account of his wife, she on their account, and all in God.

   In brief, "A store of excellence is a woman of worth, who eateth not
   the bread of idleness; and the laws of mercy are on her tongue; who
   openeth her mouth wisely and rightly; whose children rise up and call
   her blessed," as the sacred Word says by Solomon: "Her husband also,
   and he praiseth her. For a pious woman is blessed; and let her praise
   the fear of the Lord." [1692]

   And again, "A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband." [1693] They
   must, as far as possible, correct their gestures, looks, steps, and
   speech. For they must not do as some, who, imitating the acting of
   comedy, and practising the mincing motions of dancers, conduct
   themselves in society as if on the stage, with voluptuous movements,
   and gliding steps, and affected voices, casting languishing glances
   round, tricked out with the bait of pleasure. "For honey drops from the
   lips of a woman who is an harlot; who, speaking to please, lubricates
   thy throat. But at last thou wilt find it bitterer than bile, and
   sharper than a two-edged sword. For the feet of folly lead those who
   practice it to hell after death." [1694]

   The noble Samson was overcome by the harlot, and by another woman was
   shorn of his manhood. But Joseph was not thus beguiled by another
   woman. The Egyptian harlot was conquered. And chastity, [1695] assuming
   to itself bonds, appears superior to dissolute licence. Most excellent
   is what has been said:--


   "In fine, I know not how

   To whisper, nor effeminately,

   To walk about with my neck awry,

   As I see others--lechers there

   In numbers in the city, with hair plucked out." [1696]

   But feminine motions, dissoluteness, and luxury, are to be entirely
   prohibited. For voluptuousness of motion in walking, "and a mincing
   gait," as Anacreon says, are altogether meretricious.

   "As seems to me," says the comedy, "it is time [1697] to abandon
   meretricious steps and luxury." And the steps of harlotry lean not to
   the truth; for they approach not the paths of life. Her tracks are
   dangerous, and not easily known. [1698] The eyes especially are to be
   sparingly used, since it is better to slip with the feet than with the
   eyes. [1699] Accordingly, the Lord very summarily cures this malady:
   "If thine eye offend thee, cut it out," [1700] He says, dragging lust
   up from the foundation. But languishing looks, and ogling, which is to
   wink with the eyes, is nothing else than to commit adultery with the
   eyes, lust skirmishing through them. For of the whole body, the eyes
   are first destroyed. "The eye contemplating beautiful objects (kala),
   gladdens the heart;" that is, the eye which has learned rightly (kalos)
   to see, gladdens. "Winking with the eye, with guile, heaps woes on
   men." [1701] Such they introduce the effeminate Sardanapalus, king of
   the Assyrians, sitting on a couch with his legs up, fumbling at his
   purple robe, and casting up the whites of his eyes. Women that follow
   such practices, by their looks offer themselves for prostitution. "For
   the light of the body is the eye," says the Scripture, by which the
   interior illuminated by the shining light appears. Fornication in a
   woman is in the raising of the eyes. [1702]

   "Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication,
   uncleanness, inordinate affection, and concupiscence, and covetousness,
   which is idolatry: for which things' sake cometh the wrath of God upon
   the children of disobedience," [1703] cries the apostle.

   But we enkindle the passions, and are not ashamed.

   Some of these women eating mastich, [1704] going about, show their
   teeth to those that come near. And others, as if they had not fingers,
   give themselves airs, scratching their heads with pins; and these made
   either of tortoise or ivory, or some other dead creature they procure
   at much pains. And others, as if they had certain efflorescences, in
   order to appear comely in the eyes of spectators, stain their faces by
   adorning them with gay-coloured unguents. Such a one is called by
   Solomon "a foolish and bold woman," who "knows not shame. She sits at
   the door of her house, conspicuously in a seat, calling to all that
   pass by the way, who go right on their ways;" by her style and whole
   life manifestly saying, "Who among you is very silly? let him turn to
   me." And those devoid of wisdom she exhorts, saying, "Touch sweetly
   secret bread, and sweet stolen water;" meaning by this, clandestine
   love (from this point the Boeotian Pindar, coming to our help, says,
   "The clandestine pursuit of love is something sweet"). But the
   miserable man "knoweth not that the sons of earth perish beside her,
   and that she tends to the level of hell." But says the Instructor: "Hie
   away, and tarry not in the place; nor fix thine eye on her: for thus
   shalt thou pass over a strange water, and cross to Acheron." [1705]
   Wherefore thus saith the Lord by Isaiah, "Because the daughters of Sion
   walk with lofty neck, and with winkings of the eyes, and sweeping their
   garments as they walk, and playing with their feet; the Lord shall
   humble the daughters of Sion, and will uncover their form" [1706]
   --their deformed form. I, deem it wrong that servant girls, who follow
   women of high rank, should either speak or act unbecomingly to them.
   But I think it right that they should be corrected by their mistresses.
   With very sharp censure, accordingly, the comic poet Philemon says:
   "You may follow at the back of a pretty servant girl, seen behind a
   gentlewoman; and any one from the Plataeicum may follow close, and ogle
   her." For the wantonness of the servant recoils on the mistress;
   allowing those who attempt to take lesser liberties not to be afraid to
   advance to greater; since the mistress, by allowing improprieties,
   shows that she does not disapprove of them. And not to be angry at
   those who act wantonly, is a clear proof of a disposition inclining to
   the like. "For like mistress like wench," [1707] as they say in the
   proverb.

        Walking.

   Also we must abandon a furious mode of walking, and choose a grave and
   leisurely, but not a lingering step.

   Nor is one to swagger in the ways, nor throw back his head to look at
   those he meets, if they look at him, as if he were strutting on the
   stage, and pointed at with the finger. Nor, when pushing up hill, are
   they to be shoved up by their domestics, as we see those that are more
   luxurious, who appear strong, but are enfeebled by effeminacy of soul.

   A true gentleman must have no mark of effeminacy visible on his face,
   or any other part of his body. Let no blot on his manliness, then, be
   ever found either in his movements or habits. Nor is a man in health to
   use his servants as horses to bear him. For as it is enjoined on them,
   "to be subject to their masters with all fear, not only to the good and
   gentle, but also to the froward," [1708] as Peter says; so fairness,
   and forbearance, and kindness, are what well becomes the masters. For
   he says: "Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of
   another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be humble," and so forth, "that
   ye may inherit a blessing," [1709] excellent and desirable.

        The Model Maiden.

   Zeno the Cittiaean thought fit to represent the image of a young maid,
   and executed the statue thus: "Let her face be clean, her eyebrows not
   let down, nor her eyelids open nor turned back. Let her neck not be
   stretched back, nor the members of her body be loose. But let the parts
   that hang from the body look as if they were well strung; let there be
   the keenness of a well-regulated mind [1710] for discourse, and
   retention of what has been rightly spoken; and let her attitudes and
   movements give no ground of hope to the licentious; but let there be
   the bloom of modesty, and an expression of firmness. But far from her
   be the wearisome trouble that comes from the shops of perfumers, and
   goldsmiths, and dealers in wool, and that which comes from the other
   shops where women, meretriciously dressed, pass whole days as if
   sitting in the stews."

        Amusements and Associates.

   And let not men, therefore, spend their time in barbers' shops and
   taverns, babbling nonsense; and let them give up hunting for the women
   who sit near, [1711] and ceaselessly talking slander against many to
   raise a laugh.

   The game of dice [1712] is to be prohibited, and the pursuit of gain,
   especially by dicing, [1713] which many keenly follow. Such things the
   prodigality of luxury invents for the idle. For the cause is idleness,
   and a love [1714] for frivolities apart from the truth. For it is not
   possible otherwise to obtain enjoyment without injury; and each man's
   preference of a mode of life is a counterpart of his disposition.

   But, as appears, only intercourse with good men benefits; on the other
   hand, the all-wise Instructor, by the mouth of Moses, recognising
   companionship with bad men as swinish, forbade the ancient people to
   partake of swine; to point out that those who call on God ought not to
   mingle with unclean men, who, like swine, delight in corporeal
   pleasures, in impure food, and in itching with filthy pruriency after
   the mischievous delights of lewdness.

   Further, He says: "Thou art not to eat a kite or swift-winged ravenous
   bird, or an eagle," [1715] meaning: Thou shalt not come near men who
   gain their living by rapine. And other things also are exhibited
   figuratively.

   With whom, then, are we to associate? With the righteous, He says
   again, speaking figuratively; for everything "which parts the hoof and
   chews the cud is clean." For the parting of the hoof indicates the
   equilibrium of righteousness, and ruminating points to the proper food
   of righteousness, the word, which enters from without, like food, by
   instruction, but is recalled from the mind, as from the stomach, to
   rational recollection. And the spiritual man, having the word in his
   mouth, ruminates the spiritual food; and righteousness parts the hoof
   rightly, because it sanctifies us in this life, and sends us on our way
   to the world to come.

        Public Spectacles.

   The Instructor will not then bring us to public spectacles; nor
   inappropriately might one call the racecourse and the theatre "the seat
   of plagues;" [1716] for there is evil counsel as against the Just One,
   [1717] and therefore the assembly against Him is execrated. These
   assemblies, indeed, are full of confusion [1718] and iniquity; and
   these pretexts for assembling are the cause of disorder--men and women
   assembling promiscuously if for the sight of one another. In this
   respect the assembly has already shown itself bad: for when the eye is
   lascivious, [1719] the desires grow warm; and the eyes that are
   accustomed to look impudently at one's neighbours during the leisure
   granted to them, inflame the amatory desires. Let spectacles,
   therefore, and plays that are full of scurrility and of abundant
   gossip, be forbidden. [1720] For what base action is it that is not
   exhibited in the theatres? And what shameless saying is it that is not
   brought forward by the buffoons? And those who enjoy the evil that is
   in them, stamp the clear images of it at home. And, on the other hand,
   those that are proof against these things, and unimpressible, will
   never make a stumble in regard to luxurious pleasures.

   For if people shall say that they betake themselves to the spectacles
   as a pastime for recreation, I should say that the cities which make a
   serious business of pastime are not wise; for cruel contests for glory
   which have been so fatal are not sport. No more is senseless
   expenditure of money, nor are the riots that are occasioned by them
   sport. And ease of mind is not to be purchased by zealous pursuit of
   frivolities, for no one who has his senses will ever prefer what is
   pleasant to what is good.

        Religion in Ordinary Life.

   But it is said we do not all philosophize. Do we not all, then, follow
   after life? What sayest thou? How hast thou believed? How, pray, dost
   thou love God and thy neighbour, if thou dost not philosophize? And how
   dost thou love thyself, if thou dost not love life? It is said, I have
   not learned letters; but if thou hast not learned to read, thou canst
   not excuse thyself in the case of hearing, for it is not taught. And
   faith is the possession not of the wise according to the world, but of
   those according to God; and it is taught without letters; and its
   handbook, at once rude and divine, is called love--a spiritual book. It
   is in your power to listen to divine wisdom, ay, and to frame your life
   in accordance with it. Nay, you are not prohibited from conducting
   affairs in the world decorously according to God. Let not him who sells
   or buys aught name two prices for what he buys or sells; but stating
   the net price, and studying to speak the truth, if he get not his
   price, he gets the truth, and is rich in the possession of rectitude.
   But, above all, let an oath on account of what is sold be far from you;
   and let swearing, too, on account of other things be banished.

   And in this way those who frequent the market-place and the shop
   philosophize. "For thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in
   vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in
   vain." [1721]

   But those who act contrary to these things--the avaricious, the liars,
   the hypocrites, those who make merchandise of the truth--the Lord cast
   out of His Father's court, [1722] not willing that the holy house of
   God should be the house of unrighteous traffic either in words or in
   material things.

        Going to Church.

   Woman and man are to go to church [1723] decently attired, with natural
   step, embracing silence, possessing unfeigned love, pure in body, pure
   in heart, fit to pray to God. Let the woman observe this, further. Let
   her be entirely covered, unless she happen to be at home. For that
   style of dress is grave, and protects from being gazed at. And she will
   never fall, who puts before her eyes modesty, and her shawl; nor will
   she invite another to fall into sin by uncovering her face. For this is
   the wish of the Word, since it is becoming for her to pray veiled.
   [1724]

   They say that the wife of Æneas, through excess of propriety, did not,
   even in her terror at the capture of Troy, uncover herself; but, though
   fleeing from the conflagration, remained veiled.

        Out of Church.

   Such ought those who are consecrated to Christ appear, and frame
   themselves in their whole life, as they fashion themselves in the
   church [1725] for the sake of gravity; and to be, not to seem such--so
   meek, so pious, so loving. But now I know not how people change their
   fashions and manners with the place. As they say that polypi,
   assimilated to the rocks to which they adhere, are in colour such as
   they; so, laying aside the inspiration of the assembly, after their
   departure from it, they become like others with whom they associate.
   Nay, in laying aside the artificial mask of solemnity, they are proved
   to be what they secretly were. After having paid reverence to the
   discourse about God, they leave within [the church] what they have
   heard. And outside they foolishly amuse themselves with impious
   playing, and amatory quavering, occupied with flute-playing, and
   dancing, and intoxication, and all kinds of trash. They who sing thus,
   and sing in response, are those who before hymned immortality,--found
   at last wicked and wickedly singing this most pernicious palinode, "Let
   us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die." But not to-morrow in truth,
   but already, are these dead to God; burying their dead, [1726] that is,
   sinking themselves down to death. The apostle very firmly assails them.
   "Be not deceived; neither adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
   themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
   railers," and whatever else he adds to these, "shall inherit the
   kingdom of God." [1727]

        Love and the Kiss of Charity.

   And if we are called to the kingdom of God, let us walk worthy of the
   kingdom, loving God and our neighbour. But love is not proved by a
   kiss, but by kindly feeling. But there are those, that do nothing but
   make the churches resound with a kiss, [1728] not having love itself
   within. For this very thing, the shameless use of a kiss, which ought
   to be mystic, occasions foul suspicions and evil reports. The apostle
   calls the kiss holy. [1729]

   When the kingdom is worthily tested, we dispense the affection of the
   soul by a chaste and closed mouth, by which chiefly gentle manners are
   expressed.

   But there is another unholy kiss, full of poison, counterfeiting
   sanctity. Do you not know that spiders, merely by touching the mouth,
   afflict men with pain? And often kisses inject the poison of
   licentiousness. It is then very manifest to us, that a kiss is not
   love. For the love meant is the love of God. "And this is the love of
   God," says John, "that we keep His commandments;" [1730] not that we
   stroke each other on the mouth. "And His commandments are not
   grievous." But salutations of beloved ones in the ways, full as they
   are of foolish boldness, are characteristic of those who wish to be
   conspicuous to those without, and have not the least particle of grace.
   For if it is proper mystically "in the closet" to pray to God, it will
   follow that we are also to greet mystically our neighbour, whom we are
   commanded to love second similarly to God, within doors, "redeeming the
   time." "For we are the salt of the earth." [1731] "Whosoever shall
   bless his friend early in the morning with a loud voice, shall be
   regarded not to differ from cursing." [1732]

        The Government of the Eyes.

   But, above all, it seems right that we turn away from the sight of
   women. For it is sin not only to touch, but to look; and he who is
   rightly trained must especially avoid them. "Let thine eyes look
   straight, and thine eyelids wink right." [1733] For while it is
   possible for one who looks to remain stedfast; yet care must be taken
   against falling. For it is possible for one who looks to slip; but it
   is impossible for one, who looks not, to lust. For it is not enough for
   the chaste to be pure; but they must give all diligence, to be beyond
   the range of censure, shutting out all ground of suspicion, in order to
   the consummation of chastity; so that we may not only be faithful, but
   appear worthy of trust. For this is also consequently to be guarded
   against, as the apostle says, "that no man should blame us; providing
   things honourable, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the
   sight of men." [1734] "But turn away thine eyes from a graceful woman,
   and contemplate not another's beauty," says the Scripture. [1735] And
   if you require the reason, it will further tell you, "For by the beauty
   of woman many have gone astray, and at it affection blazes up like
   fire;" [1736] the affection which arises from the fire which we call
   love, leading to the fire which will never cease in consequence of sin.
     

   [1668] 1 Pet. ii. 12.

   [1669] [Surely the costly and gorgeous ecclesiastical raiment of the
   Middle Ages is condemned by Clement's primitive maxims.]

   [1670] Plato's words are: "The web is not to be more than a woman's
   work for a month. White colour is peculiarly becoming for the gods in
   other things, but especially in cloth. Dyes are not to be applied,
   except for warlike decorations."--Plato: De Legibus, xii. 992.

   [1671] [Another law against colours in clerical attire.]

   [1672] Kara Logon. The reading in the text is katalogon.

   [1673] Rom. xiii. 14.

   [1674] [Natural instinct is St. Paul's argument (1 Cor. xi. 14, 15);
   and that it rules for modesty in man as well as women, is finely
   illustrated by an instructive story in Herodotus (book i. 8-12). The
   wife of Gyges could be guilty of a heathenish revenge, but nature
   taught her to abhor exposure. "A woman who puts off her raiment, puts
   off her modesty," said Candaules to her foolish husband.]

   [1675] Prov. xi. 22.

   [1676] [Possibly used thus early as a distinction of matrons.]

   [1677] Heutuchousais, for which the text has entochousais.

   [1678] Ecclus. xxi. 21.

   [1679] [How this was followed, is proved by the early Christian devices
   of the catacombs, contrasted with the engraved gems from Pompeii, in
   the Museo Borbonico at Naples.]

   [1680] Masculine.

   [1681] geglummenous, written on the margin of Codex clxv. for
   gegumnomenous (naked) of the text. [Royal Library, Naples.]

   [1682] Ps. cxxxiii. 2.

   [1683] [Here Clement's rules are arbitrary, and based on their existing
   ideas of propriety. If it be not improper to shave the head, much less
   to shave the face, which he allows in part.]

   [1684] "Not" does not occur in the mss.

   [1685] For dedoikotes, the conjectural emendation dedukotes, has been
   adopted.

   [1686] phulassein, Sylburg and Bod. Reg., agree better than malassein
   with the context.

   [1687] [The chrism (confirmation) was thus administered then, not with
   material oil, and was called anointing, with reference to 1 John ii.
   27. Consult Bunsen, however, who attributes great antiquity to his
   canons (collected in vol. iii. Hippolytus), p. 22, Church and House
   Book.]

   [1688] 1 Cor. xi. 3. Nov. reads "Christ," as in St. Paul, instead of
   "God."

   [1689] 1 Tim. ii. 9.

   [1690] 1 Pet. iii. 1-4.

   [1691] In reference to Prov. xxxi. 22.

   [1692] Prov. xxxi. 26, 27, 28, 30, quoted from memory, and with variety
   of reading.

   [1693] Prov. xii. 4.

   [1694] Prov. v. 3-5, Septuagint.

   [1695] We have read from the New College ms. sophrosune for
   sophrosunes.

   [1696] From some comic poet.

   [1697] Some read oran apoleipei . [New College ms.] In the translation
   the conjecture ora apoleipein is adopted.

   [1698] An adaptation of Prov. v. 5, 6.

   [1699] An imitation of Zeno's saying, "It is better to slip with the
   feet than the tongue."

   [1700] Quoting from memory, he has substituted ekkopson for exele
   (Matt. v. 29).

   [1701] Prov. x. 10.

   [1702] Ecclus. xxvi. 9.

   [1703] Col. iii. 5, 6.

   [1704] [A similar practice, very gross and unbecoming, prevails among
   the lower class of girls brought together in our common schools.]

   [1705] Prov. ix. 13-18.

   [1706] to aschemon schema (Isa. iii. 16, 17), Sept.

   [1707] a kuon, catella. The literal English rendering is coarser and
   more opprobrious than the original, which Helen applies to herself
   (Iliad, vi. 344, 356).

   [1708] 1 Pet. ii. 18.

   [1709] 1 Pet. iii. 8. Clement has substituted tapeinophrones for
   philophrones (courteous).

   [1710] This passage has been variously amended and translated. The
   reading of the text has been adhered to, but orthonou has been coupled
   with what follows.

   [1711] Sylburg suggests pariouas (passing by) instead of parizousas.

   [1712] kubos, a die marked on all the six sides. [This prohibition
   would include cards in modern ethics.]

   [1713] dia ?on astragalon. The astragaloi were dice marked on four
   sides only. Clemens seems to use the terms here indifferently.

   [1714] Lowth's conjecture of eros instead of era has been adopted.

   [1715] Lev. xi. 13, 14; Deut. xiv. 12.

   [1716] Ps. i. 1, Septuagint.

   [1717] Acts iii. 14.

   [1718] anamixias adopted instead of the reading amixias, which is
   plainly wrong.

   [1719] lichneuouses on the authority of the Pal. ms. Nov. Reg. Bod.

   [1720] [Jeremy Collier's Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness
   of the English Stage (London, 1698) and the discussions that followed
   belong to literature, and ought to be republished with historic notes.]

   [1721] Ex. xx. 7.

   [1722] In allusion to the cleansing of the temple (John ii. 13-17;
   Matt. xxi. 12, 13; Luke xix. 45, 46).

   [1723] [This early use of the word "church" for the place or house of
   worship, is to be noted. See Elucidation ii.]

   [1724] 1 Cor. xi. 5. [This helps to the due rendering of exousian epi
   tes kephales in 1 Cor. xi. 10.]

   [1725] [1 Cor. xi. 22. But I cannot say that the word ekklesia is used
   for the place of Christian worship, even in this text, where it seems
   to be in antithesis with the dwelling-house.]

   [1726] Matt. viii. 22.

   [1727] 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10.

   [1728] [The sexes sat apart in the primitive churches, and the kiss of
   peace was given by women only to women (Bunsen, Hippol., iii. p. 15).
   Does the author, here, imply that unholy kissing had crept in? Among
   the Germans, even in our days, nothing is more common than to see men,
   not at all related, salute one another in this way. It was therefore
   all one with shaking hands, in the apostolic ordinance. For some very
   fine reflections on the baiser de paix, see De Masitre, Soirèes, ii. p.
   199, ed. Paris, 1850.]

   [1729] Rom. xvi. 16.

   [1730] 1 John v. 3.

   [1731] Matt. v. 13.

   [1732] Prov. xxvii. 14.

   [1733] Prov. iv. 25.

   [1734] 2 Cor. viii. 20, 21.

   [1735] Ecclus. ix. 8.

   [1736] Ecclus. ix. 8.
     

      Chapter XII.--Continuation: with Texts from Scripture.

   I would counsel the married never to kiss their wives in the presence
   of their domestics. For Aristotle does not allow people to laugh to
   their slaves. And by no means must a wife be seen saluted in their
   presence. It is moreover better that, beginning at home with marriage,
   we should exhibit propriety in it. For it is the greatest bond of
   chastity, breathing forth pure pleasure. Very admirably the tragedy
   says:--


   "Well! well! ladies, how is it, then, that among men,

   Not gold, not empire, or luxury of wealth,

   Conferred to such an extent signal delights,

   As the right and virtuous disposition

   Of a man of worth and a dutiful wife?"

   Such injunctions of righteousness uttered by those who are conversant
   with worldly wisdom are not to be refused. Knowing, then, the duty of
   each, "pass the time of your sojourning here in fear: forasmuch as ye
   know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, such as silver
   or gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your
   fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without
   blemish and without spot." [1737] "For," says Peter, "the time past of
   our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when
   we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
   banquetings, and abominable idolatries." [1738] We have as a limit the
   cross of the Lord, by which we are fenced and hedged about from our
   former sins. Therefore, being regenerated, let us fix ourselves to it
   in truth, and return to sobriety, and sanctify ourselves; "for the eyes
   of the Lord are on the righteous, and His ears are open to their
   prayer; but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil." [1739]
   And who is he that will harm us, if we be followers of that which is
   good?" [1740] --"us" for "you." But the best training is good order,
   which is perfect decorum, and stable and orderly power, which in action
   maintains consistence in what it does. If these things have been
   adduced by me with too great asperity, in order to effect the salvation
   which follows from your correction; they have been spoken also, says
   the Instructor, by me: "Since he who reproves with boldness is a
   peacemaker." [1741] And if ye hear me, ye shall be saved. And if ye
   attend not to what is spoken, it is not my concern. And yet it is my
   concern thus: "For he desires the repentance rather than the death of a
   sinner." [1742] "If ye shall hear me, ye shall eat the good of the
   land," the Instructor again says, calling by the appellation "the good
   of the land," beauty, wealth, health, strength, sustenance. For those
   things which are really good, are what "neither ear hath heard, not
   hath ever entered into the heart" [1743] respecting Him who is really
   King, and the realities truly good which await us. For He is the giver
   and the guard of good things. And with respect to their participation,
   He applies the same names of things in this world, the Word thus
   training in God the feebleness of men from sensible things to
   understanding.

   What has to be observed at home, and how our life is to be regulated,
   the Instructor has abundantly declared. And the things which He is wont
   to say to children by the way, [1744] while He conducts them to the
   Master, these He suggests, and adduces the Scriptures themselves in a
   compendious form, setting forth bare injunctions, accommodating them to
   the period of guidance, and assigning the interpretation of them to the
   Master. [1745] For the intention of His law is to dissipate fear,
   emancipating free-will in order to faith. "Hear," He says, "O child,"
   who art rightly instructed, the principal points of salvation. For I
   will disclose my ways, and lay before thee good commandments; by which
   thou wilt reach salvation. And I lead thee by the way of salvation.
   Depart from the paths of deceit.

   "For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, and the way of the
   ungodly shall perish." [1746] "Follow, therefore, O son, the good way
   which I shall describe, lending to me attentive ears." "And I will give
   to thee the treasures of darkness, hidden and unseen" [1747] by the
   nations, but seen by us. And the treasures of wisdom are unfailing, in
   admiration of which the apostle says, "O the depth of the riches and
   the wisdom!" [1748] And by one God are many treasures dispensed; some
   disclosed by the law, others by the prophets; some to the divine mouth,
   and others to the heptad of the spirit singing accordant. And the Lord
   being one, is the same Instructor by all these. Here is then a
   comprehensive precept, and an exhortation of life, all-embracing: "As
   ye would that men should do unto you, do ye likewise to, them." [1749]
   We may comprehend the commandments in two, as the Lord says, "Thou
   shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
   with all thy strength; and thy neighbour as thyself." Then from these
   He infers, "on this hang the law and the prophets." [1750] Further, to
   him that asked, "What good thing shall I do, that I may inherit eternal
   life?" He answered, "Thou knowest the commandments?" And on him
   replying Yea, He said, "This do, and thou shalt be saved." Especially
   conspicuous is the love of the Instructor set forth in various salutary
   commandments, in order that the discovery may be readier, from the
   abundance and arrangement of the Scriptures. We have the Decalogue
   [1751] given by Moses, which, indicating by an elementary principle,
   simple and of one kind, defines the designation of sins in a way
   conducive to salvation: "Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not
   worship idols. Thou shalt not corrupt boys. Thou shalt not steal. Thou
   shall not bear false witness. Honour thy father and thy mother." [1752]
   And so forth. These things are to be observed, and whatever else is
   commanded in reading the Bible. And He enjoins on us by Isaiah: "Wash
   you, and make you clean. Put away iniquities from your souls before
   mine eyes. Learn to do well. Seek judgment. Deliver the wronged. Judge
   for the orphan, and justify the widow. And come, and let us reason
   together, saith the Lord." [1753] And we shall find many examples also
   in other places,--as, for instance, respecting prayer: "Good works are
   an acceptable prayer to the Lord," says the Scripture. [1754] And the
   manner of prayer is described. "If thou seest," it is said, "the naked,
   cover him; and thou shalt not overlook those who belong to thy seed.
   Then shall thy light spring forth early, and thy healing shall spring
   up quickly; and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory
   of God shall encompass thee." What, then, is the fruit of such prayer?
   "Then shall thou call, and God will hear thee; whilst thou art yet
   speaking, He will say, I am here." [1755]

   In regard to fasting it is said, "Wherefore do ye fast to me? saith the
   Lord. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, even a day for a man to
   humble his soul? Thou shall not bend thy neck like a circle, and spread
   sackcloth and ashes under thee. Not thus shall ye call it an acceptable
   fast."

   What means a fast, then? "Lo, this is the fast which I have chosen,
   saith the Lord. Loose every band of wickedness. Dissolve the knots of
   oppressive contracts. Let the oppressed go free, and tear every unjust
   bond. Break thy bread to the hungry; and lead the houseless poor into
   thy house. If thou see the naked cover him." [1756] About sacrifices
   too: "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me? saith
   the Lord. I am full of burnt-offerings and of rams; and the fat of
   lambs, and the blood of bulls and kids I do not wish; nor that ye
   should come to appear before me. Who hath required this at your hands?
   You shall no more tread my court. If ye bring fine flour, the vain
   oblation is an abomination to me. Your new moons and your sabbaths I
   cannot away with." [1757] How, then, shall I sacrifice to the Lord?
   "The sacrifice of the Lord is," He says, "a broken heart." [1758] How,
   then, shall I crown myself, or anoint with ointment, or offer incense
   to the Lord? "An odour of a sweet fragrance," it is said, [1759] "is
   the heart that glorifies Him who made it." These are the crowns and
   sacrifices, aromatic odours, and flowers of God.

   Further, in respect to forbearance. "If thy brother," it is said, "sin
   against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. If he sin
   against thee seven times in a day, and turn to thee the seventh time,
   and say, I repent, forgive him." [1760] Also to the soldiers, by John,
   He commands, "to be content with their wages only;" and to the
   publicans, "to exact no more than is appointed." To the judges He says,
   "Thou shalt not show partiality in judgment. For gifts blind the eyes
   of those who see, and corrupt just words. Rescue the wronged."

   And to householders: "A possession which is acquired with iniquity
   becomes less." [1761]

   Also of "love." "Love," He says, "covers a multitude of sins." [1762]

   And of civil government: "Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's;
   and unto God the things which are God's." [1763]

   Of swearing and the remembrance of injuries: "Did I command your
   fathers, when they went out of Egypt, to offer burnt-offerings and
   sacrifices? But I commanded them, Let none of you bear malice in his
   heart against his neighbour, or love a false oath." [1764]

   The liars and the proud, too, He threatens; the former thus: "Woe to
   them that call bitter sweet, and sweet bitter;" and the latter: "Woe
   unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
   sight." [1765] "For he that humbleth himself shall be exalted, and he
   that exalteth himself shall be humbled." [1766]

   And "the merciful" He blesses, "for they shall obtain mercy."

   Wisdom pronounces anger a wretched thing, because "it will destroy the
   wise." [1767] And now He bids us "love our enemies, bless them that
   curse us, and pray for them that despitefully use us." And He says: "If
   any one strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also; and
   if any one take away thy coat, hinder him not from taking thy cloak
   also." [1768]

   Of faith He says: "Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye
   shall receive." [1769] "To the unbelieving nothing is trustworthy,"
   according to Pindar.

   Domestics, too, are to be treated like ourselves; for they are human
   beings, as we are. For God is the same to free and bond, if you
   consider.

   Such of our brethren as transgress, we must not punish, but rebuke.
   "For he that spareth the rod hateth his son." [1770]

   Further, He banishes utterly love of glory, saying, "Woe to you,
   Pharisees! for ye love the chief seat in the synagogues, and greetings
   in the markets." [1771] But He welcomes the repentance of the
   sinner--loving repentance--which follows sins. For this Word of whom we
   speak alone is sinless. For to sin is natural and common to all. But to
   return [to God] after sinning is characteristic not of any man, but
   only of a man of worth.

   Respecting liberality He said: "Come to me, ye blessed, inherit the
   kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for I was an
   hungry, and ye gave Me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink; I was
   a stranger, and ye took Me in; naked, and ye clothed Me; sick, and ye
   visited Me; in prison, and ye came unto Me." And when have we done any
   of these things to the Lord?

   The Instructor Himself will say again, loving to refer to Himself the
   kindness of the brethren, "Inasmuch as ye have done it to these least,
   ye have done it to Me. And these shall go away into everlasting life."
   [1772]

   Such are the laws of the Word, the consolatory words not on tables of
   stone which were written by the finger of the Lord, but inscribed on
   men's hearts, on which alone they can remain imperishable. Wherefore
   the tablets of those who had hearts of stone are broken, that the faith
   of the children may be impressed on softened hearts.

   However, both the laws served the Word for the instruction of humanity,
   both that given by Moses and that by the apostles. What, therefore, is
   the nature of the training by the apostles, appears to me to require to
   be treated of. Under this head, I, or rather the Instructor by me,
   [1773] will recount; and I shall again set before you the precepts
   themselves, as it were in the germ.

   "Putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour: for we
   are members one of another. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath;
   neither give place to the devil. Let him that stole steal no more: but
   rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is good,
   that he may have to give to him that needeth. Let all bitterness, and
   wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking, be put away from you,
   with all malice: and be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted,
   forgiving one another, as God in Christ hath forgiven you. Be therefore
   wise, [1774] followers of God, as dear children; and walk in love, as
   Christ also hath loved us. Let wives be subject to their own husbands,
   as to the Lord. And let husbands love their wives as Christ also hath
   loved the Church." Let those who are yoked together love one another
   "as their own bodies." "Children, be obedient to your parents. Parents,
   provoke not your children to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture
   and admonition of the Lord. Servants, be obedient to those that are
   your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in the
   singleness of your hearts, as unto Christ; with good-will from the soul
   doing service. ye masters, treat your servants well, forbearing
   threatening: knowing that both their and your Lord is in heaven; and
   there is no respect of persons with Him." [1775]

   "If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit. Let us not be
   desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Bear
   ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. Be not
   deceived; God is not mocked. Let us not be weary in well-doing: for in
   due time we shall reap, if we faint not." [1776]

   "Be at peace among yourselves. Now we admonish you, brethren, warn them
   who are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient
   toward all men. See that none render evil for evil to any man. Quench
   not the Spirit. Despise not prophesyings. Prove all things: hold fast
   that which is good. Abstain from every form of evil." [1777]

   "Continue in prayer, watching thereunto with thanksgiving. Walk in
   wisdom towards them that are without, redeeming the time. Let your
   speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how
   ye ought to answer every man." [1778]

   "Nourish yourselves up in the words of faith. Exercise yourselves unto
   godliness: for bodily exercise profiteth little; but godliness is
   profitable for all things, having the promise of the life which now is,
   and that which is to come." [1779]

   "Let those who have faithful masters not despise them, because they are
   brethren; but rather do them service, because they are faithful."
   [1780]

   "He that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with
   diligence; he that showeth mercy, with cheerfulness. Let love be
   without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which
   is good. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in
   honour preferring one another. Not slothful in business; fervent in
   spirit, serving the Lord. Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation;
   continuing instant in prayer. Given to hospitality; communicating to
   the necessities of the saints." [1781]

   Such are a few injunctions out of many, for the sake of example, which
   the Instructor, running over the divine Scriptures, sets before His
   children; by which, so to speak, vice is cut up by the roots, and
   iniquity is circumscribed.

   Innumerable commands such as these are written in the holy Bible
   appertaining to chosen persons, some to presbyters, some to bishops,
   some to deacons, others to widows, [1782] of whom we shall have another
   opportunity of speaking. Many things spoken in enigmas, many in
   parables, may benefit such as fall in with them. But it is not my
   province, says the Instructor, to teach these any longer. But we need a
   Teacher of the exposition of those sacred words, to whom we must direct
   our steps.

   And now, in truth, it is time for me to cease from my instruction, and
   for you to listen to the Teacher. [1783] And He, receiving you who have
   been trained up in excellent discipline, will teach you the oracles. To
   noble purpose has the Church sung, and the Bridegroom also, the only
   Teacher, the good Counsel, of the good Father, the true Wisdom, the
   Sanctuary of knowledge. "And He is the propitiation for our sins," as
   John says; Jesus, who heals both our body and soul--which are the
   proper man. "And not for our sins only, but also for the whole world.
   And by this we know that we know Him, if we keep His commandments. He
   that saith, I know Him, and keepeth not His commandments, is a liar;
   and the truth is not in Him. But whoso keepeth His word, in him verily
   is the love of God perfected. Hereby know we that we are in Him. He
   that saith he abideth in Him, ought himself to walk even as He also
   walked." [1784] O nurslings of His blessed training! let us complete
   the fair face of the church; and let us run as children to our good
   mother. And if we become listeners to the Word, let us glorify the
   blessed dispensation by which man is trained and sanctified as a child
   of God, and has his conversation in heaven, being trained from earth,
   and there receives the Father, whom he learns to know on earth. The
   Word both does and teaches all things, and trains in all things.

   A horse is guided by a bit, and a bull is guided by a yoke, and a wild
   beast is caught in a noose. But man is transformed by the Word, by whom
   wild beasts are tamed, and fishes caught, and birds drawn down. He it
   is, in truth, who fashions the bit for the horse, the yoke for the
   bull, the noose for the wild beast, the rod for the fish, the snare for
   the bird. He both manages the state and tills the ground; commands, and
   helps, and creates the universe.


   "There were figured earth, and sky, and sea,

   The ever-circling sun, and full-orbed moon,

   And all the signs that crown the vault of heaven." [1785]

   O divine works! O divine commands! "Let this water undulate within
   itself; let this fire restrain its wrath; let this air wander into
   ether; and this earth be consolidated, and acquire motion! When I want
   to form man, I want matter, and have matter in the elements. I dwell
   with what I have formed. If you know me, the fire will be your slave."

   Such is the Word, such is the Instructor, the Creator of the world and
   of man: and of Himself, now the world's Instructor, by whose command we
   and the universe subsist, and await judgment. "For it is not he who
   brings a stealthy vocal word to men," as Bacchylidis says, "who shall
   be the Word of Wisdom;" but "the blameless, the pure, and faultless
   sons of God," according to Paul, "in the midst of a crooked and
   perverse generation, to shine as lights in the world." [1786]

   All that remains therefore now, in such a celebration of the Word as
   this, is that we address to the Word our prayer.

      Prayer to the Paedagogus.

   Be gracious, O Instructor, to us Thy children, Father, Charioteer of
   Israel, Son and Father, both in One, O Lord. Grant to us who obey Thy
   precepts, that we may perfect the likeness of the image, and with all
   our power know Him who is the good God and not a harsh judge. And do
   Thou Thyself cause that all of us who have our conversation in Thy
   peace, who have been translated into Thy commonwealth, having sailed
   tranquilly over the billows of sin, may be wafted in calm by Thy Holy
   Spirit, by the ineffable wisdom, by night and day to the perfect day;
   and giving thanks may praise, and praising thank the Alone Father and
   Son, Son and Father, the Son, Instructor and Teacher, with the Holy
   Spirit, all in One, in whom is all, for whom all is One, for whom is
   eternity, whose members we all are, whose glory the aeons [1787] are;
   for the All-good, All-lovely, All-wise, All-just One. To whom be glory
   both now and for ever. Amen.

   And since the Instructor, by translating us into His Church, has united
   us to Himself, the teaching and all-surveying Word, it were right that,
   having got to this point, we should offer to the Lord the reward of due
   thanksgiving--praise suitable to His fair instruction.

    A Hymn to Christ the Saviour.

   Composed by St. Clement. [1788]

   I.


   Bridle of colts untamed,

   Over our wills presiding;

   Wing of unwandering birds,

   Our flight securely guiding.

   Rudder of youth unbending,

   Firm against adverse shock;

   Shepherd, with wisdom tending

   Lambs of the royal flock:

   Thy simple children bring

   In one, that they may sing

   In solemn lays

   Their hymns of praise

   With guileless lips to Christ their King.

   II.


   King of saints, almighty Word

   Of the Father highest Lord;

   Wisdom's head and chief;

   Assuagement of all grief;

   Lord of all time and space,

   Jesus, Saviour of our race;

   Shepherd, who dost us keep;

   Husbandman, who tillest,

   Bit to restrain us, Rudder

   To guide us as Thou willest;

   Of the all-holy flock celestial wing;

   Fisher of men, whom Thou to life dost bring;

   From evil sea of sin,

   And from the billowy strife,

   Gathering pure fishes in,

   Caught with sweet bait of life:

   Lead us, Shepherd of the sheep,

   Reason-gifted, holy One;

   King of youths, whom Thou dost keep,

   So that they pollution shun:

   Steps of Christ, celestial Way;

   Word eternal, Age unending;

   Life that never can decay;

   Fount of mercy, virtue-sending;

   Life august of those who raise

   Unto God their hymn of praise,

   Jesus Christ!

   III.


   Nourished by the milk of heaven,

   To our tender palates given;

   Milk of wisdom from the breast

   Of that bride of grace exprest;

   By a dewy spirit filled

   From fair Reason's breast distilled;

   Let us sucklings join to raise

   With pure lips our hymns of praise

   As our grateful offering,

   Clean and pure, to Christ our King.

   Let us, with hearts undefiled,

   Celebrate the mighty Child.

   We, Christ-born, the choir of peace;

   We, the people of His love,

   Let us sing, nor ever cease,

   To the God of peace above.

   We subjoin the following literal translation of the foregoing hymn:--

   Bridle of untamed colts, Wing of unwandering birds, sure Helm of babes,
   [1789] Shepherd of royal lambs, assemble Thy simple children to praise
   holily, to hymn guilelessly with innocent mouths, Christ the guide of
   children. O King of saints, all-subduing Word of the most high Father,
   Ruler of wisdom, Support of sorrows, that rejoicest in the ages, [1790]
   Jesus, Saviour of the human race, Shepherd, Husbandman, Helm, Bridle,
   Heavenly Wing of the all-holy flock, Fisher of men who are saved,
   catching the chaste fishes with sweet life from the hateful wave of a
   sea of vices,--Guide [us], Shepherd of rational sheep; guide unharmed
   children, O holy King, [1791] O footsteps of Christ, O heavenly way,
   perennial Word, immeasurable Age, Eternal Light, Fount of mercy,
   performer of virtue; noble [is the] life of those who hymn God, O
   Christ Jesus, heavenly milk of the sweet breasts of the graces of the
   Bride, pressed out of Thy wisdom. Babes nourished with tender mouths,
   filled with the dewy spirit of the rational pap, let us sing together
   simple praises, true hymns to Christ [our] King, holy fee for the
   teaching of life; let us sing in simplicity the powerful Child. O choir
   of peace, the Christ-begotten, O chaste people, let us sing together
   [1792] the God of peace. [1793]

      To the Paedagogus.


   Teacher, to Thee a chaplet I present,

   Woven of words culled from the spotless mead,

   Where Thou dost feed Thy flocks; like to the bee,

   That skilful worker, which from many a flower

   Gathers its treasures, that she may convey

   A luscious offering to the master's hand.

   Though but the least, I am Thy servant still,

   (Seemly is praise to Thee for Thy behests).

   O King, great Giver of good gifts to men,

   Lord of the good, Father, of all the Maker,

   Who heaven and heaven's adornment, by Thy word

   Divine fitly disposed, alone didst make;

   Who broughtest forth the sunshine and the day;

   Who didst appoint their courses to the stars,

   And how the earth and sea their place should keep;

   And when the seasons, in their circling course,

   Winter and summer, spring and autumn, each [1794]

   Should come, according to well-ordered plan;

   Out of a confused heap who didst create

   This ordered sphere, and from the shapeless mass

   Of matter didst the universe adorn;--

   Grant to me life, and be that life well spent,

   Thy grace enjoying; let me act and speak

   In all things as Thy Holy Scriptures teach; [1795]

   Thee and Thy co-eternal Word, All-wise,

   From Thee proceeding, ever may I praise;

   Give me nor poverty nor wealth, but what is meet,

   Father, in life, and then life's happy close. [1796]
     

   [1737] 1 Pet. i. 17-19.

   [1738] 1 Pet. iv. 3.

   [1739] Ps. xxxiv. 15, 16.

   [1740] 1 Pet. iii. 13.

   [1741] Prov. x. 10, Sept.

   [1742] Ezek. xviii. 23.

   [1743] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [1744] [Here the paedagogue is the child-guide, leading to the Teacher.]

   [1745] [Important foot-note, Kaye, p. 105.]

   [1746] Ps. i. 6.

   [1747] Isa. xlv. 3.

   [1748] Rom. xi. 33.

   [1749] Luke vi. 31.

   [1750] Matt. xxii. 37, 39, 40.

   [1751] [See Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 482, this series. Stromata, vi. 360.]

   [1752] Ex. xx.; Deut. v.

   [1753] Isa. i. 16, 17, 18.

   [1754] Where, no one knows.

   [1755] Isa. lviii. 7, 8, 9.

   [1756] Isa. lvii. 6, 7.

   [1757] Isa. i. 11-14.

   [1758] Ps. li. 17.

   [1759] Not in Scripture. [Irenaeus, iv. 17, vol. i. 444, this series.]

   [1760] Luke xvii. 3, 4.

   [1761] Prov. xiii. 11.

   [1762] 1 Pet. iv. 8.

   [1763] Matt. xxii. 21; Mark xii. 17; Luke xx. 25.

   [1764] In Jer. vii. 22, 23, and Zech. viii. we find the substance of
   what Clement gives here.

   [1765] Isa. v. 20, 21.

   [1766] Luke xiv. 11, xviii. 14.

   [1767] Prov. xvi. Sept.

   [1768] Matt. v. 40; Luke vi. 27-29.

   [1769] Matt. xxi. 22.

   [1770] Prov. xiii. 24.

   [1771] Luke xi. 43.

   [1772] Matt. xxv. 34-36, 40, 46.

   [1773] di emautou. The reading here adopted is found in Bod. and Reg.

   [1774] iphronimoi, not found in Eph. v. 1.

   [1775] Eph. iv. 25-29, v. 1, 2, 22, 25, vi. 1, 4-9.

   [1776] Gal. v. 25, 26, vi. 2, 7, 9.

   [1777] 1 Thess. v. 13-15, 19-22.

   [1778] Col. iv. 2, 5, 9.

   [1779] 1 Tim. iv. 6-8.

   [1780] 1 Tim. vi. 2.

   [1781] Rom. xii. 8-13.

   [1782] [Consult Bunsen's Handbook, book iv. pp. 75-82. Thus did
   primitive Christianity labour to uproot the social estate of
   heathenism.]

   [1783] That is, he who undertakes the instruction of those that are
   full-grown, as Clemens does in the Stromata. [Where see his esoteric
   doctrine.]

   [1784] 1 John ii. 2-6.

   [1785] Iliad, xviii. 483-485; spoken of Vulcan making the shield of
   Archilles.

   [1786] Phil. ii 15.

   [1787] Aiones, "celestial spirits and angels."--Grabe, in a note on
   Bull's Defence of the Nicene Creed. [I wish a more definite reference
   had been furnished by the learned translator. Even Kaye's reference is
   not precise. Consulting Grabe's annotations in vain, I was then obliged
   to go through the foot-notes, where, at last (vol. v. part i. p. 246.),
   I found in comparative obscurity Grabe's language. It may be rendered:
   "These words I think should be thus construed--cujus gloria sunt
   soecula--whose glory are the heavenly spirits or angels. Concerning
   which signification of ton aionon, note what I have said among divers
   annotations on Irenaeus, p. 32. ed. Benedict."]

   [1788] [Elucidation III.] The translator has done what he could to
   render this hymn literally. He has been obliged, however, to add
   somewhat to it in the way of expansion, for otherwise it would have
   been impossible to secure anything approaching the flow of English
   versification. The original is in many parts a mere string of epithets,
   which no ingenuity could render in rhymed verse without some additions.

   [1789] Or, "ships:" neon, instead of nepion, has been suggested as
   better sense and better metre.

   [1790] Or, "rejoicing in eternity."

   [1791] By altering the punctuation, we can translate thus: "Guide, O
   holy King, Thy children safely along the footsteps of Christ."

   [1792] The word used here is psalomen, originally signifying, "Let us
   celebrate on a stringed instrument." Whether it is so used here or not,
   may be matter of dispute.

   [1793] [The holy virgin of Nazareth is the author of the first
   Christian hymn, The Magnificat. It is a sequel to the psalms of her
   father David, and interprets them. To Clement of Alexandria belongs the
   praise of leading the choir of uninspired Christian poets, whom he thus
   might seem to invoke to carry on the strain through all time.]

   [1794] [The hymn suffixed to Thomson's Seasons might seem to have been
   suggested by this ancient example of praise to the Maker. But, to feel
   this hymn, we must reflect upon its superiority, in a moral point of
   view, to all the Attic Muse had ever produced before.]

   [1795] [The Scriptures are the rule of faith.]

   [1796] [Kaye's careful criticism of M. Barbeyrac's captious complains
   against Clement, are specially instructive. p. 109.]
     
     

  Elucidations.

      I

   (Paedagogue, book II. chap. 3, p. 247.)

   This fine paragraph is in many ways interesting. The tourist who has
   visited the catacombs, is familiar, among tokens of the first rude art
   of Christians, with relics of various articles, realizing this idea of
   Clement's, that even our furniture should be distinctively Christian.
   In Pompeii, one finds lamps and other vessels marked by heathenish
   devices, some of them gross and revolting. On the contrary, these
   Christian utensils bear the sacred monograms ChR, AO, or the figure of
   the fish, conveying to the user, by the letters of the Greek word for a
   fish (IChThUS), the initials of the words "Jesus Christ, Son of God,
   The Saviour." Often we have the anchor, the palm-branch, or the cross
   itself. But I never looked at one of those Christian lamps without
   imagining its owner, singing, as it was lighted, the eventide hymn (of
   which see Elucidation III.), and reciting probably, therewith, the
   text, "Let your loins be girded, and your lamps burning," etc. For a
   valuable elucidation of subjects illustrated by Christian art, see
   Testimony of the Catacombs, by the late Wharton B. Marriott (London,
   Hatchards, 1870).

      II.

   (Book iii. Going to Church. p. 290, supra.)

   Frequent references become necessary, at this point, to the
   ecclesiastical usages of the early Christians. These have been largely
   treated of by the great Anglican divines, whose works are recognised as
   part of the standard literature of Christendom; but the nature of this
   publication seems to impose on me the duty of choosing from external
   sources, rather than from authors who have been more or less associated
   with the controversies of our great "Anglo-Saxon" family. Happily the
   writings of the late Dr. Bunsen supply us with all that is requisite of
   this sort. In that very curious and characteristic medley, Hippolytus
   and His Age, he has gathered into a convenient form nearly every point
   which requires antiquarian elucidation, under the title of The Church
   and Home Book of the Ancient Christians. Its contents he professes to
   have rescued "from the rubbish in which they were enveloped for
   centuries, and disencumbered of the fraud and misunderstanding by which
   they are defaced." Now, while by no means satisfied with this work
   myself, it affords an interesting specimen of the conclusions to which
   an earnest and scholarly mind has been brought, in the course of
   original and industrious research. It is the more interesting, as
   illustrating a conviction, which he expresses elsewhere, that, in
   shaping "the Church of the future," all Christians must revert to these
   records of primitive antiquity, as of practical interest for our own
   times. The proverbial faults of its author are indeed conspicuous in
   this work, which, though the product of a mere inquirer, is presented
   to us with entire self-reliance, as if he were competent to pronounce
   upon all questions with something like pontifical infallibility. It is
   also greatly mixed up with his personal theories, which are always
   interesting, but rarely satisfactory to his readers. In spite of all
   this, he has brought together, in a condensed form, what is undoubtedly
   the result of patient investigation. It is the rather useful, because
   it is the work of a genuine disciple of Niebuhr, who doubts and
   questions at every step, and who always suspects a fraud. He is
   committed, by his religious persuasions, to no system whatever, with
   respect to such matters, and he professes to have produced a manual of
   Christian antiquity, entirely scientific; that is to say, wholly
   impartial, indifferent as to consequences, and following only the lead
   of truth and evidence. In my references to Bunsen, therefore, let it be
   understood, that, without accepting him as my own master, I yet wish to
   respect his opinion and to commend his performance to the candid
   investigation of others.

      III.

   The one ancient hymn, not strictly liturgical, which probably was not
   new even to Clement, and to which we have already made reference once
   or twice, is the following, which we give from Bunsen. He calls it "The
   Evening Hymn of the Greek Christians," but it was not confined to the
   Greeks any more than was the Greek of the Gospels and the Creeds. Its
   proper name is "The Eventide Hymn," or "The Hymn for the Lighting of
   the Lamps," and was doubtless uttered in the family at "candlelight,"
   as we say a grace before meat. It is thus rendered:--

      Hymn.


   Serene light of the Holy Glory

   Of the Father Everlasting,

   Jesus Christ:

   Having come to the setting of the sun,

   And seeing the evening light,

   We praise the Father and the Son,

   And the Holy Spirit of God.

   It behooveth to praise Thee,

   At all times with holy songs,

   Son of God, who hast given life;

   Therefore the world glorifieth Thee.

   The modern Italians, at sunset, recite the Ave Maria, which has been
   imposed upon them by mediaeval Rome. Nothing but the coincidence of the
   hour reminds us of the ancient hymn which it has superseded; and a
   healthy mind, one would think, would note the contrast. This pure "hymn
   to Christ as God," and to the Godhead in unity, gives place to an act
   of worship addressed to the creature, more than to the Creator. One
   might indeed call this Ave Maria the eventide hymn of modern Italy; but
   the scatter-brain processes of Dr. Bunsen come out in the strange
   reversal of thought, by which he would throw back the utterly
   incongruous title of its Italian substitute upon a primitive hymn to
   the Trinity,--"the Ave-Maria hymn, as we might call it from the present
   Italian custom," etc. The strange confusion of ideas which constantly
   characterizes this author, whenever some association, however remote,
   strikes his fancy, is well illustrated by this instance. Let it serve
   as a caution in following his lead. See Hippolytus (vol. iii. pp. 68,
   138, etc.) and also Routh (Reliquiae, vol. iii. pp. 515-520). Concerning
   the morning hymn, Gloria in Excelsis, which Dr. Bunsen gives from the
   Alexandrian ms., and to which reference is made in his Analecta
   Ante-Nicaena (iii. 86), see Warren's Celtic Liturgy (p. 197, and index
   references. Ed. Oxford, 1881).